"This article has been accepted for publication and undergone full peer review but has not been through the copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading process, which may lead to differences between this version and the Version of Record. Please cite this article as doi: 10.1111/AJI.13454 This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved Article type : Short Communication Corresponding author mail id: lakshmi.krishnan@nrc.ca IFN-alpha receptor deficiency enhances host resistance to oral Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium infection during murine pregnancy Authors: Gerard Agbayani1*, Kristina Clark1*, Jagdeep K Sandhu1, Melissa Hewitt1, Subash Sad2, Shawn P Murphy3,4 and Lakshmi Krishnan1,2 *Both authors contributed equally to the manuscript 1Division of Life Sciences, Human Health Therapeutics, National Research Council Canada, Ottawa, ON, Canada K1A 0R6 2Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada K1H 8M5 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA 4Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA Corresponding Author: Dr. Lakshmi Krishnan 1200 Montreal Road, M-54, Room 124 Ottawa, ON, Canada, K1A 0R6 Tel (613) 991-3210A cc ep te d A rt ic le This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved Fax (613) 941-4475 Running Title: Oral Salmonella Typhimurium infection during pregnancy Keywords: pregnancy, Salmonella, cell death, oral infection, type I interferon, cytokines Abstract Problem: Maternal tolerance during pregnancy increases the risk of infection with certain intracellular pathogens. Systemic Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (S.Tm) infection during pregnancy in normally-resistant 129X1/SvJ mice leads to severe placental infection, fetal and maternal death. However, the effect of oral infection with S.Tm in pregnant mice and the role of infection-induced inflammation and cell death pathway in contributing to susceptibility to infection is unclear. Method of Study: Non-pregnant and pregnant C57BL/6J wild-type (WT) and cell death pathwayaltered mice (IFNAR1-/-, Caspase-1,11-/-, RIP3-/-) were infected orally with S.Tm. Host survival and fetal resorption were determined. Bacterial burden in mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs), spleen, liver and placental tissue was enumerated at various time-points post-infection. Serum cytokine expression was measured through cytometric bead array. Results: Oral infection of WT mice with S.Tm on days 9-10 of gestation resulted in systemic dissemination of the bacteria, substantial placental colonization and fetal loss five days post-infection. Histopathological examination of the placentas indicated that infection induced widespread focal necrosis and neutrophil infiltration throughout the spongiotrophoblast (SpT) layer. In the nonpregnant state, IFNAR1-/mice exhibited increased survival following oral S.Tm infection relative to Caspase-1,11-/-, RIP3-/and WT mice. The increased resistance to S.Tm infection in IFNAR1-/mice was seen during pregnancy as well, with decreased bacterial burden within MLNs, spleen and placenta, which correlated to the decreased resorptions relative to WT and Caspase-1,11-/mice. Conclusion: Oral S.Tm exposure leads to placental infection, inflammation and resorption, whereas IFNAR1 deficiency enhances host resistance both in the non-pregnant and pregnant states. A cc ep te d A rt ic le This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved Introduction Salmonella is a gram negative, intracellular, foodborne pathogen belonging to the Enterobacteriaceae family. Clinical manifestations of Salmonella infection are typically classified as typhoid and non-typhoid presentation. In humans, typhoid or enteric fever is characterized by systemic infection attributed to S. enterica serovars Typhi and Paratyphi A (1). Typhoid fever is estimated to affect 26.9 million people globally, with more than 200,000 cases leading to deaths every year (2,3). In contrast, non-typhoidal salmonellosis (NTS) typically manifests as a self-limiting acute gastroenteritis in immune-competent individuals. The major serovars associated with NTS are S. enterica serovars Typhimurium (S.Tm) and Enteritidis (4,5). NTS affects more than 90 million people worldwide, causing 155,000 deaths annually (6). Case fatalities associated with invasive NTS is increased in Sub-Saharan Africa, particularly in children, elderly people and immune-compromised, as well as in areas of low socio-demographic development (7). S.Tm infection in mice is an established model of human typhoid fever due to similarities in intestinal pathology, bacterial growth characteristics, tissue distribution and overall systemic disease (8). Upon oral infection, S.Tm invades epithelial and M cells of the intestinal mucosa, leading to immune cell recruitment and activation (9). S.Tm also migrates to the mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs) both autonomously and within host cells (10). While the MLN functions as an important site of antigen presentation and for limiting systemic dissemination by S.Tm, it can also be exploited by S.Tm as a niche for bacterial growth (11). Dendritic cells (DCs) and macrophages can also contribute to systemic disease by harboring live bacteria from the gut wall and migrating to distant sites (9,12– 15). Intracellular Salmonella within macrophages survive and replicate within the modified Salmonella-containing vacuole (SCV) (16). Salmonella can also induce cell death of macrophages, allowing bacterial escape from the cell into systemic circulation (17). However, the production of proinflammatory cytokines, including IL-18 and IL-1β in response to S.Tm infection augments innate immunity including the recruitment of polymorphonuclear phagocytes (9,18). Bacteria that are not cleared from the blood migrate to the liver and spleen, which act as additional niches for pathogen growth (9). Thus, the complex interplay between pathogen virulence mechanisms and host responses determine the dynamics of S.Tm proliferation and systemic dissemination.A cc ep te d A rt ic le This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved In experimental models, initiation of infection by the intravenous route allows for the direct study of systemic infection. However, oral dosing of bacteria mimics the natural route of infection and can provide insight into the kinetics of infection dissemination and clinical course in the host. An effective oral infection model in mice was previously established by pre-treating mice with oral streptomycin prior to gavage with streptomycin-resistant Salmonella, to allow for consistent gut colonization by S.Tm (19,20). Gastrointestinal immune pathologies associated with infection in mice mimics clinical symptoms of enterocolitis in humans (21). Furthermore, high dose oral infection leads to bacterial dissemination into systemic organs (22). Thus, oral infection in combination with streptomycin pre-treatment provides a suitable model for examining pathogen-induced intestinal inflammation and systemic disease (23). Intracellular pathogens can exploit host cellular inflammation and programmed cell death pathways as a mechanism of virulence and survival within the host. Type I interferons (IFNs) are a large family of cytokines that bind the ubiquitous transmembrane IFN-alpha receptor (IFNAR) (24). Among the type I IFN subtypes, IFN-α and IFN-β are primarily involved in the activation of innate and adaptive immune responses during infection (24). C57BL/6J (wild-type) mice succumb to S.Tm infection rapidly due to enhanced macrophage death through necroptosis compared to mice deficient in IFNAR1 expression (IFNAR1-/-) (25). Necroptosis is an inflammatory cell death pathway mediated through phosphorylation of receptor-interacting protein kinase 3 (RIP3) and RIP1 following Toll-like receptor or cytokine receptor signalling (26,27). Type I IFNs induce macrophage necroptosis through induction of RIP1 and RIP3 activation and RIP1-IFNAR association (25). Thus, pathogen-induced type I IFN-dependent necroptosis is detrimental to host survival during S.Tm infection (25). In contrast, pyroptosis is a Caspase-1-mediated cell death pathway that leads to the induction of proinflammatory IL-18 and IL-1β cytokines (28). Deficiency in Caspase-1 expression is associated with reduced resistance to oral Salmonella, indicating a protective role for pyroptosis in the control of infection (29). Taken together, cell death pathways triggered following infection can be critical in the modulation of host immunity. Maternal tolerance during pregnancy results in changes to immune responsiveness that may impact resolution of infection. Normally resistant mice, such as 129X1/SvJ and 129/SvE strains, become highly susceptible to systemic Salmonella infection during pregnancy. This is associated with A cc ep te d A rt ic le This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved altered splenic responses in the maternal host, including diminished recruitment of innate immune cells, enhanced IL-10 responses, and increased splenic ratios of anti-inflammatory Treg to proinflammatory Th17 cells (30). Increased fetal loss during infection correlates with profound placental expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines (30). We also showed human trophoblast-derived IL-10 to promote profound intracellular replication by S.Tm through inhibition of SCV maturation (31). However, the impact of cell death pathways on maternal immunity to Salmonella infection during pregnancy and the mechanisms of Salmonella-induced placental inflammation and trophoblast cell death are not well-understood (32). Herein, we investigated whether inflammatory cell death pathways contribute to increased susceptibility of pregnant hosts during oral S.Tm infection. Materials and Methods Mice and Mating. C57BL/6J wild-type (WT) mice (8-10 weeks old) were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, Maine, USA) and acclimated for 1 week prior to any matings or experiments. RIP3-/mice were provided by Dr. V. Dixit (Genentech, San Francisco, USA) (33). IFNAR1-/mice were from Dr. K. Murali-Krishna (Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA) (34,35). Caspase-1,11-/double knock-out mice were a kind gift from Dr. R. Flavell (Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, USA) (36). All mice were housed in a pathogen-free facility at the National Research Council Canada. Experiments were performed in accordance with protocols 2013.03 and 2017.04 approved by the institutional Animal Care Committee. Mouse mating was conducted as previously described (37). Fetal resorptions, which are characterized by uterine necrotic scars or as necrotic and/or hemorrhagic fetuses and placentas, were determined using the formula R/(R + V) × 100, where R is the number of resorbing fetuses and V is the number of viable fetuses per mouse. In Vivo Infections and Bacterial Enumeration. Mice were infected with streptomycin-resistant wild-type Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium strain SL1344 (S.Tm) through the oro-gastric route using a modified protocol of streptomycin pre-treatment and bacterial gavage (21,38). Streptomycin pre-treatment was performed to reduce commensal gut bacterial numbers, thereby promoting consistent gastrointestinal colonization by pathogenic bacteria (21,38,39). One day prior to infection, S.Tm was grown overnight in Lysogeny Broth (LB) (BD, Mississauga, ON, Canada) A cc ep te d A rt ic le This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved containing 50 μg/mL of streptomycin at 37oC with shaking at 200 rpm in a shaking incubator. Pregnant (day 8 and 9 of pregnancy) and non-pregnant mice were deprived of food and water for 3 hours before oral gavage with 20 mg streptomycin sulfate salt/100 μL water per mouse. Food and water were returned ad libitum two hours after treatment. On the day of infection, S.Tm was subcultured in fresh LB containing 50 μg/mL of streptomycin at a ratio of 1:40 (500 μL overnight culture in 20 mL LB broth containing streptomycin). The bacterial culture was grown to a standardized OD600 of 0.8 within 2.5 to 3 hours. Bacteria were spun down at 12,000 rpm for 5 minutes and re-suspended in 0.9% sodium chloride (saline) for a final dose of 1x108 S.Tm colony-forming units (CFUs)/100 μL saline per mouse. Pregnant mice (days 9-10 of gestation) and non-pregnant controls were also deprived of food and water for 3 hours prior to oral infection. Food and water were returned ad libitum 2 hours post-infection. Experimental end point for survival curve was based on clinical score, including >20% loss in body weight, lack of grooming, piloerection and morbidity. Mice were euthanized 3 or 5 days post-oral challenge for bacterial enumeration in the spleen, liver, MLNs and pooled placentas. The fetoplacental units were removed from the uterine horns and transferred to petri-dishes containing sterile 1x phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Each placenta was carefully separated from the fetus while in PBS solution to minimize bacterial contamination from surrounding maternal and fetal tissues and prevent tissue drying. Placentas were pooled per mouse prior to processing to obtain sufficient bacterial numbers for enumeration. Spleen and MLNs were homogenized using sterilized frosted microscope slides. Liver and pooled placentas were processed using sterilized glass homogenizing tubes and pestles. Ten-fold serial dilutions of the tissue homogenates were plated onto LB agar plates. Bacterial colonies were enumerated after overnight incubation at 37oC. Placental Histology. Placentas were removed from non-infected and infected (day 5 post-infection) mice at days 14-15 of gestation, fixed for 24 h in 10% neutral-buffered formalin at room temperature and then transferred into 70% ethanol until further processing. Tissues were embedded in paraffin, sectioned at 5 µm and subjected to hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining. Sections were examined for placental pathology by personnel blinded to experiments. Neutrophils were identified by their typical polymorphonuclear appearance, and necrosis was identified by loss of nuclear and cellular A cc ep te d A rt ic le This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved structure. Representative images were captured on an Olympus IX81 bright-field microscope equipped with a DP27 color CCD camera. Serum Cytokine Measurements. Serum was collected from whole blood using Microtainer® serum separator tubes (BD, Mississauga, ON, Canada). Cytokine expression levels were evaluated using the Cytometric Bead Array (CBA) Mouse Inflammation Kit (IL-6, IL-10, MCP-1, IFN-γ, TNF and IL12p70) and individual Flex Sets (IL-1β and KC) (BD Biosciences, Mississauga, ON, Canada). Samples were acquired using the BD LSRFortessaTM and analyzed using the FCAP Array™ software (Soft Flow Hungary Ltd., Pécs, Hungary). Cytokine expression levels were presented as pg/mL. Statistical Analysis. All statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 7 (GraphPad, La Jolla, CA, USA) software. Survival data were analyzed through log-rank (Mantel Cox) test and Gehan-Breslow-Wilcoxon test. Statistical significance of bacterial enumeration data was determined using the non-parametric, two-tailed Mann Whitney U test or Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn’s multiple comparisons post-hoc test, as indicated in the figure legends. Resorption rates and serum cytokine measurements were analyzed using two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. P values of ≤0.05 were considered statistically significant. *: p ≤ 0.05, **: p ≤ 0.01, ***: p ≤ 0.001, ****: p ≤ 0.0001. Results and Discussion The use of an oral infection model has the potential to provide insight into the mechanisms involved in S.Tm trafficking from the gut to the placenta via the natural route of infection. Experimental oral Salmonella infection without streptomycin pre-treatment often causes high variability in bacterial colonization of the intestinal mucosa and highlights the importance of gut microbiota in intestinal immunity (20,39,40). A wide array of commensal bacteria colonize the human gut and assist in gut homeostasis, as well as create a barrier against invading pathogens by competing with pathogens for nutrients and preventing pathogen adherence to the intestinal epithelium (20,41). Mouse models demonstrate that S.Tm infection in the gut results in inflammation, thereby allowing A cc ep te d A rt ic le This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved S.Tm to successfully colonize the gut by outcompeting host microbiota (42). The dose of nontyphoidal Salmonella generally considered to cause gastroenteritis in healthy human individuals is ~105 to 106 CFUs, which may be even further decreased in susceptible populations such as pregnant women (43). However, this dose may not be directly applicable to mouse models due to genetic differences relative to humans (i.e., mouse-specific TLR11 expression) that may impact host susceptibility to Salmonella infection (44). S.Tm has also been used in multiple studies at 108-109 CFU dose in streptomycin pre-treated C57BL/6 (WT) mice in the non-pregnant state (4,5). We first standardized an oral gavage model of S.Tm infection in non-pregnant and pregnant hosts to ensure consistent systemic and placental infection. WT mice were treated with streptomycin 24 hours prior to oral gavage with 107 S.Tm CFUs. Bacteria were enumerated in MLNs, spleen, liver and pooled placental tissues at day 3 or 5 post-infection. Firstly, streptomycin-untreated non-pregnant WT mice showed higher variability in bacterial burden in MLNs, spleen and liver compared to treated mice at day 5 post-infection, indicating that streptomycin pre-treatment promotes consistent infection in tissues (Fig. 1A). Secondly, pregnant WT mice exhibited similar bacterial burden in the MLNs and spleen at day 3 and 5 post-infection with a dose of 107 S.Tm CFUs (Fig. 1B and 1C). However, placental bacterial numbers were below the limit of detection at day 3 post-infection (Fig. 1B), although some placental infection was seen by day 5 post-infection following a dose of 107 S.Tm CFUs (Fig. 1C). In contrast, with a higher dose of 108 S.Tm CFUs infection, we observed a higher but consistent infection in the spleen and MLN of both pregnant and non-pregnant mice, and more strikingly, a ~10-100-fold increase in the bacterial numbers in placentas relative to the spleen and MLN by day 5 post infection (Fig. 1D). Thus, a combination of streptomycin pre-treatment and high S.Tm infection dose (108 S.Tm CFUs) was used for the rest of the study. Placental trophoblasts provide a major niche for intracellular infection by S.Tm. We previously showed that human JEG-3 trophoblast cells actively internalized the bacteria through receptor-mediated endocytosis in vitro (31). Once inside the cell, S.Tm underwent profound replication due to inhibition of SCV maturation by trophoblast-derived IL-10 (31). In another study, we demonstrated that maternal disease progression and placental pathology in mice infected intravenously with S.Tm were associated with profound neutrophil influx in placental tissues (37). Pregnant mice infected with virulent S.Tm (wild-type strain SL1344) exhibited extensive bacterial A cc ep te d A rt ic le This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved distribution throughout the trophoblast labyrinth region, which became progressively indiscernible due to severe tissue necrosis (37). In contrast, bacteria were primarily confined in the outer decidual layers when systemic infection was induced using avirulent S.Tm (ΔaroA strain SL3261). Placentas infected with avirulent S.Tm also exhibited healthy morphology, with clear maternal artery and cellular appearance similar to non-infected placentas (37). Therefore, the extent of S.Tm invasion of placental layers were largely indicative of the magnitude of ensuing placental necrosis and accompanying neutrophil influx. In the current study, we examined the extent of immune cell infiltration and tissue damage/death in the maternal-fetal interface of WT mice when infection was induced through the oral route. Individual placentas were processed for H&E staining from noninfected (days 14-15 of gestation) and infected (day 14-15 of gestation, day 5 post-infection) mice. A total of 23 individual placenta from pregnant non-infected, and 33 individual placenta from pregnant infected mice were processed for H&E staining and analysis. Representative data is shown in Fig 1E; at days 14-15 of gestation, the placenta is fully mature and three distinct placental layers namely, decidua (dec), junctional zone (jz) and labyrinth (lab) were readily identified in the WT pregnant noninfected (Fig. 1-E1) and infected mice (Fig. 1-E5). Gross examination of non-infected placentas as compared to infected placentas showed similar overall placental architecture and size. However, as fully resorbed placentas from infected mice cannot be processed, as such the infected placentas are representative of pre-resorption stage and may be underestimating the extent of cellular damage. Numerous glycogen trophoblast cell clusters (GlyT) were seen within the spongiotrophoblast (SpT) layer and beyond the trophoblast giant cell (TGC) layer (Fig. 1-E2 and 1-E6). The labyrinth layer was highly vascular and had considerably higher density of both maternal blood spaces and fetal blood capillaries (Fig. 1-E3, 1-E6 and 1-E8). However, gross histopathological examination of H&E stained placentas infected with S.Tm showed the expansion of the labyrinth layer and the reduction in the size of the junctional layer (Fig. 1-E1 and 1-E5). Labyrinthine expansion may be attributed to hyperproliferation as a mechanism to meet fetal growth requirements in a severe pathological condition without significantly altering placental gross morphology (45). It may also be directly triggered by placental inflammation associated with the presence of infected cells (45). Infected placentas showed cell death in the decidua and widespread focal necrosis throughout the SpT layer (Figure 1-E5-E7). Necrosis was also evident within the endothelium of fetal blood vessels in the A cc ep te d A rt ic le This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved placental labyrinth (Figure 1-E7). We consistently observed that the majority of the cell death occurred in SpT cells as compared to GlyT cells in mice infected with S.Tm. Under higher magnification, it was clearly evident that cellular necrosis was accompanied with an overt inflammatory response. An increased number of neutrophils was seen in the blood vessels and infiltrating into the placental layers with loss of tissue integrity throughout the placental tissue during infection (Figure 1-E8). It is noteworthy that a small number of neutrophils were also seen in the maternal sinuses throughout the placenta even in the non-infected state (Figure 1-E4). Taken together, our data suggest that oral infection of WT mice with S.Tm induced neutrophil-mediated placental damage, consistent with our previous intravenous infection model (37). While H&E staining enabled the identification of the dec, jz and lab layers in the current study, staining for SpTs in the jz using the trophoblast-specific protein alpha marker may provide better distinction of the three placental layers in future studies. It may also allow the statistical analysis of changes between junctional to labyrinthine layer from the non-infected to infected state. Cell death pathways can be viewed as a double-edged sword in which their tight regulation is required for successful pathogen clearance, while dysregulation may result in overt inflammation. Coexpression of Caspase-1 and -11 has been shown to promote innate immune protection against oral S.Tm challenge in non-pregnant mice through induction of pro-inflammatory IL-1β and IL-18 (29,46). A later study examining the contributions of each Caspase showed Caspase-1−/− mice to be significantly less resistant to S.Tm compared to Caspase-1,11-/mice (47). This was associated with extracellular bacterial replication and defective neutrophil-mediated clearance, indicating a detrimental role for Caspase-11 expression in the absence of Caspase-1. In contrast, we previously showed IFNAR1 expression to contribute to the susceptibility of non-pregnant mice to intravenous S.Tm challenge through sustained RIP3 activation and macrophage necroptosis (25,48). While both RIP3-/and IFNAR1-/mice exhibited reduced macrophage death during infection, only the IFNAR1-/ mice showed improved survival, highlighting the role of type I IFN-dependent macrophage necroptosis in S.Tm pathogenesis (25). In the current study, mice were infected orally with a dose of 108 S.Tm CFUs, which was used to obtain replicable infection in systemic organs and placentas (Fig. 1C vs. 1D). Non-pregnant infected (NPI) Caspase-1,11-/and RIP3-/mice exhibited similar clinical infection and survival rates relative to WT controls (Supplemental Fig. 1A). In contrast, NPI IFNAR1-A cc ep te d A rt ic le This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved /mice showed delayed susceptibility (p ≤ 0.001) relative to WT controls, consistent with previous results observed following intravenous infection (25). Overall, these results indicate the graded susceptibility of cell death pathway-altered strains to S.Tm in a non-pregnant state upon oral infection (Caspase-1,11-/> RIP3-/= WT > IFNAR1-/-) (Supplemental Fig. 1A). NPI Caspase-1,11-/mice displayed increased bacterial burden in their MLNs (p≤0.001) and spleens (p≤0.001) compared to NPI WT mice at day 5 post-infection (Supplemental Fig. 1B, 1C), consistent with other oral infection studies (29,46). Furthermore, NPI Caspase-1,11-/mice displayed increased bacterial burden in their MLNs (p≤0.0001) and spleens (p≤0.0001) compared to NPI IFNAR1-/mice (Supplemental Fig. 1B, 1C). In contrast, NPI RIP3-/-, IFNAR1-/and WT mice had similar bacterial burden within the same tissues despite the increased survival benefit in IFNAR1-/mice, suggesting that these mice may be controlling bacterial infection as it progresses past day 5 post-infection. We previously showed in our intravenous infection model that the protection conferred by IFNAR1 deficiency against S.Tm in the non-pregnant state was abrogated during pregnancy (49). This was associated with decreased serum expression of pro-inflammatory IL-12p70 compared to non-pregnant controls, suggesting a role for the cytokine in the control of systemic and placental infection during pregnancy. Furthermore, Caspase-1 and IL-1β activation in response to Plasmodium falciparum and P. berghei infections in humans and mice, respectively has been shown to impair fetal growth and induce placental pathology (50). Thus, modulation of host-pathogen interactions and cell death pathways during pregnancy may impact maternal and fetal outcomes. We examined the survival of pregnant WT and cell death pathway-altered strains upon oral infection with 108 S.Tm CFUs. PI Caspase-1,11-/and WT mice exhibited no significant differences in survival rates (Fig. 2A), which was similarly observed in the non-pregnant state (Supplemental Fig. 1A). On the other hand, RIP3-/ mice (p≤0.001) exhibited slightly increased survival rates compared to WT controls following oral S.Tm infection during pregnancy (Fig. 2A). More strikingly, PI IFNAR1-/mice (p≤0.0001) survived significantly longer than PI WT mice (Fig. 2A). Furthermore, pregnancy did not increase the susceptibility to S.Tm infection in IFNAR1-/mice relative to their non-pregnant counterparts, with a median survival of 7 days for both groups of mice (Fig. 2A and Supplemental Fig. 1A). Overall, differences were observed in pregnant infected mice (WT = Caspase-1,11-/> RIP3-/> IFNAR1-/-), with pregnant IFNAR1-/mice surviving the longest of all the cell death pathway-altered strains (Fig. A cc ep te d A rt ic le This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved 2A). Next, we compared the bacterial burden and the resorption rates among Caspase-1,11-/-, RIP3-/ and IFNAR1-/mice during pregnancy. PI Caspase-1,11-/mice did not show statistically discernible differences in the bacterial numbers in MLNs, spleen and pooled placentas compared to PI WT mice (Figure 2B-D). Fetal resorption rates were also significantly increased in both PI WT and PI Caspase1,11-/mice compared to their respective PNI controls (Figure 2E). PI RIP3-/mice and PI WT mice did not exhibit significant differences in bacterial burden among MLNs, spleens and pooled placentas, similarly to PI Caspase-1,11-/mice (Figure 2B-D). However, the difference in mean resorption rates between PI RIP3-/(46.5%) and PI WT mice (50%) was not statistically significant (Figure 2E). In contrast, PNI RIP3-/mice exhibited slightly higher resorption rates in comparison to PNI WT mice, and furthermore, upon infection, there was no significant increase in the fetal-placental resorption rate when compared to PNI RIP3-/controls (Figure 2E). These results suggest that RIP3 deficiency, which abrogates the necroptotic cell death pathway, may contribute to lack of inflammatory damage of the placenta during infection. Subsequently, we examined S.Tm outcome in terms of bacterial burden and resorption rate in pregnant IFNAR1-/mice. PI IFNAR1-/had significantly lower bacterial burdens within their MLNs, spleen and placentas when compared to WT controls at day 5 post-infection (Figure 2B-D). This correlated with significantly reduced resorption rates (15.5%) relative to WT controls (50%) and PI Caspase-1,11-/mice (87.9%) (Figure 2E). Moreover, PI IFNAR1-/mice showed significantly discernible differences in bacterial burden in MLN and splenic tissue when compared not only to PI WT mice, but also to PI Caspase-1,11-/and PI RIP3-/mice (Figure 2B, C). Thus, the absence of IFNAR1 expression reduced susceptibility to S.Tm infection not only in the nonpregnant state, but also during pregnancy. In particular, fetal survival was enhanced in infected pregnant IFNAR1-/mice. The contrasting clinical response following intravenous versus oral infection during pregnancy in IFNAR1-/mice suggests that the threshold of systemic infection can determine maternal susceptibility (49). Following oral infection, as initially fewer bacteria enter the systemic circulation, the resistance conferred by IFNAR1 deficiency can be retained even in pregnant mice. We also did not observe marked differences in gross fetal morphology upon visual inspection, as well as in resorption rates among the non-infected pregnant groups to suggest that fetal development was impacted by altered cell death mechanisms. Resorption rates in pregnant IFNAR1-/ mice also remained low both in the non-infected and infected states, while increased resorption in A cc ep te d A rt ic le This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved response to infection was observed in WT and Caspase-1,11-/mice (Fig. 2E). These results suggest that fetal resorptions were induced by infection rather than differences in fetal development. The robust induction of inflammatory cytokines is among the key early events in the efficient control of Salmonella infection (51). However, an overt cytokine storm associated with Salmonella proliferation during pregnancy contributes to maternal and fetal disease progression (37). Thus, the balance between proand anti-inflammatory responses is critical in determining host protection from infection as well as pregnancy outcomes. Serum cytokine analysis showed non-pregnant IFNAR1-/ mice to have increased IFN-γ expression at day 5 post-infection, correlating to enhanced control of S.Tm infection compared to WT controls (Fig. 2B-D & 3). IFN-γ is a critical pro-inflammatory cytokine in the control of S.Tm during enteric infection. Mice deficient in IFN-γ expression exhibit impaired intestinal immunity and systemic disease compared to WT mice upon oral challenge, even with the attenuated S.Tm aroA strain (52). IFN-α, which signals through IFNAR1, has been shown to downregulate IFN-γ expression during viral infection in mice (53). Similarly, we show that the loss of IFNAR expression in non-pregnant mice was associated with increased IFN-γ levels relative to WT controls during S.Tm infection (Fig. 3). Interestingly, IFN-γ expression was slightly reduced in pregnant IFNAR-/mice relative to their non-pregnant counterparts during infection (Fig. 3). This decrease in IFN-γ expression may be attributed to pregnancy-related mechanisms that have yet to be identified, although it appears to have no significant impact on immunity to infection in IFNAR-/ mice (Fig. 2A-D). We also noted that TNF and MCP-1 inflammatory cytokines increased from the non-infected to infected state in pregnant WT mice but not in their pregnant I FNAR1-/counterparts (Fig. 3). In contrast, IL-1β levels were significantly lower in PI IFNAR1-/mice, correlating to decreased bacterial numbers in tissues by day 5 post-infection compared to their WT counterparts (Figure 2B-D, 3). IL-1β is associated with inflammatory cell death pathways such as necroptosis (54). Furthermore, type I IFNs play critical roles in the activation of inflammasomes, which are intracellular protein complexes that regulate pro-inflammatory IL-1β maturation and secretion (55). Enteropathogenic bacteria such as S.Tm, Escherichia coli, and Citrobacter rodentium promote the activation of a non-canonical NLRP3 inflammasome by upregulating caspase-11 in a type I IFNdependent manner (47,56–58). Dysregulated IL-1β expression in maternal and/or fetal tissues has been implicated in various pregnancy complications, including preeclampsia, preterm labour and A cc ep te d A rt ic le This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved spontaneous abortion (59). Inflammasome induction driven by intra-amniotic infection has also been shown to induce spontaneous preterm labor (60). In contrast, placenta-derived IL-1β can exert a beneficial role by priming monocytes for inflammasome activation as a defense mechanism against Listeria monocytogenes infection (61). Thus, the disparate roles of IL-1β in pregnancy are modulated by specific cytokine-cellular interactions, as well as host-pathogen interactions. Lastly, IL-10 levels were similar among non-pregnant and pregnant WT and IFNAR1-/groups, and no significant differences were observed in the expression levels of IL-6, IL-12p70 and KC among all non-pregnant and pregnant groups in the non-infected and infected states (data not shown). Our results suggest that the reduced resorption rates seen in IFNAR1-/infected mice may be due to alleviated infection and inflammation-induced placental cell death. While non-pregnant and pregnant IFNAR1-/mice exhibited delayed susceptibility against S.Tm relative to their WT counterparts, mice from all groups ultimately succumbed to oral infection. The cell death pathway-altered strains used in the study were bred on the C57BL/6 WT background. C57BL/6 mice are highly-susceptible to Salmonella infection partly due to the lack of a functional natural resistance-associated macrophage protein 1 (Nramp1) gene (62). Nramp1 is a membrane protein involved in ion transport in phagocytic cells, including macrophages and dendritic cells (DCs) (63). Nramp1-expressing DCs and macrophages enhance immunity to Salmonella infection through increased inflammatory cytokine production relative to their Nramp1-deficient counterparts (64). Thus, it could be inferred that immune protection provided by IFNAR1 deficiency may be ultimately outweighed by the detrimental effects of Nramp deficiency. The relative contributions of Nramp expression in modulating maternal and fetal disease progression during S.Tm infection remain to be elucidated. Nevertheless, this is the first time that murine pregnancy studies have investigated the roles of specific cell death pathways in host susceptibility to oral infection during pregnancy with bacterial pathogens, such as S.Tm. A recent study examined the roles of type I IFN signalling on immunity to Zika virus infection during pregnancy by mating female IFNAR1−/− mice with male IFNAR1+/− mice (65). This mating strategy generated fetuses that either expressed IFNAR1 (IFNAR1+/−) or did not express (IFNAR1−/−) within the same uterus. IFNAR1 signalling mediated the control of viral replication within the placenta, wherein fetuses with a functional copy of IFNAR1 (IFNAR1+/-) were resorbed despite their A cc ep te d A rt ic le This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved low viral titres (65). In contrast, IFNAR1-/fetuses continued to develop after infection. IFNAR1 signalling also promoted fetal demise, as indicated by abnormal placental development with increased apoptotic cells within the placental labyrinth and the upregulation of hypoxia response genes within the concepti (65). Whether this phenomenon is pathogenand/or host-specific remains to be elucidated. Nevertheless, these results suggest that IFNAR1-mediated pathology outweighed the beneficial importance of IFNAR1 signalling in the control of viral infection. A similar methodology can be adapted to our oral infection model to examine the impact of fetal versus maternal IFNAR signaling on pregnancy outcomes during S.Tm infection. We surmise that the increased maternal resistance against S.Tm may effectively limit the number of bacteria reaching the placentas and/or fetuses. Consequently, this may decrease the induction of fetal inflammatory responses that are potentially detrimental to IFNAR1+/fetuses, which have functional type I IFN responses that can be exploited by S.Tm for survival. Type I IFNs also play key roles in the double-hit hypothesis, wherein viral infection sensitizes pregnant hosts to secondary inflammation induced by bacterial products, leading to pre-term births (66–68). We show in our bacterial infection model that dysregulation of select cell death pathways, either by innate immune responses or possibly as a result of host-pathogen interactions, also modulates placental dysfunction and fetal-placental demise. Inhibition of type I IFNmediated necroptosis during oral infection may be a mechanism by which S.Tm proliferation and immune evasion are curbed. Taken together, modulating inflammatory responses by targeting cell death pathways presents a therapeutic strategy in limiting maternal and fetal disease progression during viral and bacterial infections. In conclusion, we have demonstrated for the first time in this study the impact of oral S.Tm infection to induce placental damage. We also show the critical roles of inflammatory and cell death pathways in modulating host outcomes to oral S.Tm infection. Caspase-1,11 deficiency reduces bacterial control in the non-pregnant state and increases fetal resorption rates during pregnancy, indicating a protective role for pyroptosis in immunity to intracellular infection. In contrast, IFNAR1 expression reduces resistance to S.Tm infection irrespective of pregnancy and may contribute to fetalplacental demise in the context of concurrent infection during pregnancy. Thus, differential modulation of inflammatory and cell death pathways by host-pathogen interactions is a critical determinant of host immunity to intracellular infection. A cc ep te d A rt ic le This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved Authorship GA and KC contributed equally to the design and completion of the experiments, analysis of the data, and writing and editing of the manuscript. JKS conceptualized the histology studies, analyzed the data, helped write and edit the manuscript. MH performed the histology experiments and analyzed the data. SS obtained the IFNAR1-/mice and edited the manuscript. SPM contributed to the discussion and ideas and edited the manuscript. LK conceptualized the study, designed the experiments, wrote and edited the manuscript, contributed reagents, and obtained the grant funding. Acknowledgments A cc ep te d A rt ic le This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved Our study was supported by the National Research Council Canada and the National Institutes of Health National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (1R01AI101049-01). We thank Renu Dudani, Janet Clark and Komal Gurnani for performing the oral gavage. Gerard Agbayani was a recipient of the Ontario Graduate Scholarship. The authors have no conflict of interest to declare. Figure Legends Figure 1. Oral S.Tm infection causes placental pathology in WT mice. (A) Bacterial burden in MLN, spleen and liver of non-pregnant WT mice 5 days after oral infection with 107 S.Tm CFUs, with or without streptomycin pre-treatment. The experiment was conducted once with 3 mice per group. (B and C) Bacterial burden in MLNs, spleen and pooled placentas of streptomycin-pre-treated pregnant and non-pregnant WT mice 3 (B) and 5 (C) days after oral infection with 107 S.Tm CFUs. A cc ep te d A rt ic le This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved (D) Bacterial burden in streptomycin-pre-treated pregnant (PI) and non-pregnant (NPI) WT mice 5 days after oral infection with 108 S.Tm CFUs. CFU data are presented as individual data points on a scatter plot. Mean (solid horizontal line) and detection limit (dotted line) are shown. N = 3-10 mice per group. CFU data in B-D are representative of two independent experiments. (E) Streptomycinpre-treated pregnant WT mice received 108 S.Tm CFUs via the oro-gastric route and were sacrificed 5 days after infection (days 14-15 of gestation). Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissues were stained with H&E. Representative images of placentas (23 placentas from non-infected mice and 33 placentas from infected mice) from 3-4 mice per group are shown. (E1-4) represent healthy placentas from non-infected WT mice. (E5-8) represent placentas from pregnant WT mice orally-infected with S.Tm and showing placental damage. Arrows indicate necrosis and arrowheads indicate neutrophils. Asterisk indicates necrosis within the fetal blood vessels. Inset shows neutrophils at a higher magnification. Shown are: f, fetal capillaries showing nucleated embryonic red blood cells; m, maternal blood spaces; GlyT, glycogen trophoblast cell; SpT, spongiotrophoblast; TGC, trophoblast giant cell. Figure 2. IFNAR1-/mice retain increased resistance to oral S.Tm infection relative to WT controls during pregnancy. (A) Survival kinetics of streptomycin-pre-treated pregnant infected cell death pathway-altered strains versus WT controls. Median days of survival are as follows: WT = 5, Caspase-1,11-/= 5, RIP3-/= 6, IFNAR1-/= 7. Age-matched pregnant mice were treated with streptomycin 24 hours prior to oral infection with 108 CFUs of S.Tm. Survival data was pooled from 5 independent experiments. Statistical significance shown for RIP3-/(*** p ≤ 0.001) and IFNAR1-/ (**** p ≤ 0.0001) mice are relative to WT controls. N = 10-17 mice per group. MLNs (B), spleens (C) and pooled placentas (D) were collected for bacterial enumeration 5 days following oral infection with 108 CFUs of S.Tm. N = 6-18 mice per group. (E) Fetal resorption rates were determined using the formula R/(R + V) × 100, where R is the number of resorbing fetuses and V is the number of viable fetuses per mouse. N = 6-22 mice per group. CFU and fetal resorption data are presented as individual data points on a scatter plot and pooled from at least 3 independent experiments. Mean (solid horizontal line) and detection limit (dotted line) are shown. Statistical significance of survival data was determined by both the log rank (Mantel-Cox) test and the Gehan-Breslow-Wilcoxon test, A cc ep te d A rt ic le This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved with results being significant using both tests. Bacterial enumeration data were analyzed through nonparametric Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn’s multiple comparisons post-hoc test. Resorption data were analyzed using two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test (E), * p ≤ 0.05, ** p ≤ 0.01, *** p ≤ 0.001, **** p ≤ 0.0001. Figure 3. IFNAR1-/mice exhibit differential cytokine responses to oral S.Tm infection in the non-pregnant and pregnant states. Age-matched non-pregnant and pregnant mice were treated with streptomycin 24 hours prior to oral infection with S.Tm 108 CFUs. Serum cytokine expression levels were evaluated 5 days after oral infection. Cytokine measurements were performed once on infected serum samples pooled from 2 independent experiments. Serum samples from age-matched nonpregnant and pregnant (day 14-15 of gestation) mice in the non-infected state were used as negative controls. Data are presented as individual data points on a scatter plot. Mean (solid horizontal line) is shown. N = 3-5 mice per group. Statistical significance was determined using two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. * p ≤ 0.05, ** p ≤ 0.01, *** p ≤ 0.001, **** p ≤ 0.0001. A cc ep te d A rt ic le This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved References 1. Ohl ME, Miller SI. Salmonella: a model for bacterial pathogenesis. Annu Rev Med. 2001;52:259– 74. 2. Crump JA, Luby SP, Mintz ED. The global burden of typhoid fever. Bull World Health Organ. 2004 May;82(5):346–53. 3. Buckle GC, Walker CLF, Black RE. Typhoid fever and paratyphoid fever: Systematic review to estimate global morbidity and mortality for 2010. J Glob Health. 2012 Jun;2(1):010401. 4. Crum-Cianflone NF. Salmonellosis and the gastrointestinal tract: more than just peanut butter. Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 2008 Aug;10(4):424–31. 5. Saleh S, Van Puyvelde S, Staes A, Timmerman E, Barbé B, Jacobs J, et al. Salmonella Typhi, Paratyphi A, Enteritidis and Typhimurium core proteomes reveal differentially expressed proteins linked to the cell surface and pathogenicity. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2019 May;13(5):e0007416. 6. Majowicz SE, Musto J, Scallan E, Angulo FJ, Kirk M, O’Brien SJ, et al. The Global Burden of Nontyphoidal Salmonella Gastroenteritis. Clin Infect Dis. 2010 Mar 15;50(6):882–9. 7. Stanaway JD, Parisi A, Sarkar K, Blacker BF, Reiner RC, Hay SI, et al. The global burden of nontyphoidal salmonella invasive disease: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2017. Lancet Infect Dis. 2019 Dec 1;19(12):1312–24. A cc ep te d A rt ic le This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved 8. Santos RL, Zhang S, Tsolis RM, Kingsley RA, Adams LG, Bäumler AJ. Animal models of Salmonella infections: enteritis versus typhoid fever. Microbes Infect. 2001 Dec;3(14–15):1335– 44. 9. Mastroeni P, Grant A, Restif O, Maskell D. A dynamic view of the spread and intracellular distribution of Salmonella enterica. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2009 Jan;7(1):73–80. 10. Bravo-Blas A, Utriainen L, Clay SL, Kästele V, Cerovic V, Cunningham AF, et al. Salmonella enterica Serovar Typhimurium Travels to Mesenteric Lymph Nodes Both with Host Cells and Autonomously. J Immunol Baltim Md 1950. 2019 Jan 1;202(1):260–7. 11. Voedisch S, Koenecke C, David S, Herbrand H, Förster R, Rhen M, et al. Mesenteric lymph nodes confine dendritic cell-mediated dissemination of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium and limit systemic disease in mice. Infect Immun. 2009 Aug;77(8):3170–80. 12. Vazquez-Torres A, Jones-Carson J, Bäumler AJ, Falkow S, Valdivia R, Brown W, et al. Extraintestinal dissemination of Salmonella by CD18-expressing phagocytes. Nature. 1999 Oct 21;401(6755):804–8. 13. Rescigno M, Urbano M, Valzasina B, Francolini M, Rotta G, Bonasio R, et al. Dendritic cells express tight junction proteins and penetrate gut epithelial monolayers to sample bacteria. Nat Immunol. 2001 Apr;2(4):361–7. 14. Rescigno M, Rotta G, Valzasina B, Ricciardi-Castagnoli P. Dendritic cells shuttle microbes across gut epithelial monolayers. Immunobiology. 2001 Dec;204(5):572–81. 15. Rescigno M, Borrow P. The host-pathogen interaction: new themes from dendritic cell biology. Cell. 2001 Aug 10;106(3):267–70. 16. Alpuche-Aranda CM, Racoosin EL, Swanson JA, Miller SI. Salmonella stimulate macrophage macropinocytosis and persist within spacious phagosomes. J Exp Med. 1994 Feb 1;179(2):601– 8. A cc ep te d A rt ic le This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved 17. Miao EA, Leaf IA, Treuting PM, Mao DP, Dors M, Sarkar A, et al. Caspase-1-induced pyroptosis is an innate immune effector mechanism against intracellular bacteria. Nat Immunol. 2010 Dec;11(12):1136–42. 18. Sansonetti PJ. War and peace at mucosal surfaces. Nat Rev Immunol. 2004 Dec;4(12):953–64. 19. Bohnhoff M, Drake BL, Miller CP. Effect of streptomycin on susceptibility of intestinal tract to experimental Salmonella infection. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med Soc Exp Biol Med N Y N. 1954 May;86(1):132–7. 20. Bohnhoff M, Miller CP. Enhanced susceptibility to Salmonella infection in streptomycin-treated mice. J Infect Dis. 1962 Oct;111:117–27. 21. Barthel M, Hapfelmeier S, Quintanilla-Martínez L, Kremer M, Rohde M, Hogardt M, et al. Pretreatment of mice with streptomycin provides a Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium colitis model that allows analysis of both pathogen and host. Infect Immun. 2003 May;71(5):2839–58. 22. Miller CP, Bohnhoff M, Rifkind D. The Effect of an Antibiotic on the Susceptibility of the Mouse’s Intestinal Tract to Salmonella Infection. Trans Am Clin Climatol Assoc. 1957;68:51–8. 23. Grassl GA, Valdez Y, Bergstrom KSB, Vallance BA, Finlay BB. Chronic enteric salmonella infection in mice leads to severe and persistent intestinal fibrosis. Gastroenterology. 2008 Mar;134(3):768–80. 24. Stetson DB, Medzhitov R. Type I interferons in host defense. Immunity. 2006 Sep;25(3):373–81. 25. Robinson N, McComb S, Mulligan R, Dudani R, Krishnan L, Sad S. Type I interferon induces necroptosis in macrophages during infection with Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium. Nat Immunol. 2012 Oct;13(10):954–62. 26. Fuchs Y, Steller H. Live to die another way: modes of programmed cell death and the signals emanating from dying cells. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Jun;16(6):329–44. A cc ep te d A rt ic le This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved 27. Blander JM. A long-awaited merger of the pathways mediating host defence and programmed cell death. Nat Rev Immunol. 2014 Sep;14(9):601–18. 28. Lamkanfi M, Dixit VM. Manipulation of host cell death pathways during microbial infections. Cell Host Microbe. 2010 Jul 22;8(1):44–54. 29. Lara-Tejero M, Sutterwala FS, Ogura Y, Grant EP, Bertin J, Coyle AJ, et al. Role of the caspase-1 inflammasome in Salmonella typhimurium pathogenesis. J Exp Med. 2006 Jun 12;203(6):1407– 12. 30. Agbayani G, Wachholz K, Chattopadhyay A, Gurnani K, Murphy SP, Krishnan L. Modulation of Th17 and regulatory T-cell responses during murine pregnancy contributes to increased maternal susceptibility to Salmonella Typhimurium infection. Am J Reprod Immunol N Y N 1989. 2017 Dec;78(6). 31. Nguyen T, Robinson N, Allison SE, Coombes BK, Sad S, Krishnan L. IL-10 produced by trophoblast cells inhibits phagosome maturation leading to profound intracellular proliferation of Salmonella enterica Typhimurium. Placenta. 2013 Sep;34(9):765–74. 32. Pejcic-Karapetrovic B, Gurnani K, Russell MS, Finlay BB, Sad S, Krishnan L. Pregnancy Impairs the Innate Immune Resistance to Salmonella typhimurium Leading to Rapid Fatal Infection. J Immunol. 2007 Nov 1;179(9):6088–96. 33. Newton K, Sun X, Dixit VM. Kinase RIP3 is dispensable for normal NF-kappa Bs, signaling by the B-cell and T-cell receptors, tumor necrosis factor receptor 1, and Toll-like receptors 2 and 4. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Feb;24(4):1464–9. 34. Müller U, Steinhoff U, Reis LF, Hemmi S, Pavlovic J, Zinkernagel RM, et al. Functional role of type I and type II interferons in antiviral defense. Science. 1994 Jun 24;264(5167):1918–21. 35. Kolumam GA, Thomas S, Thompson LJ, Sprent J, Murali-Krishna K. Type I interferons act directly on CD8 T cells to allow clonal expansion and memory formation in response to viral infection. J Exp Med. 2005 Sep 5;202(5):637–50. A cc ep te d A rt ic le This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved 36. Kuida K, Lippke JA, Ku G, Harding MW, Livingston DJ, Su MS, et al. Altered cytokine export and apoptosis in mice deficient in interleukin-1 beta converting enzyme. Science. 1995 Mar 31;267(5206):2000–3. 37. Chattopadhyay A, Robinson N, Sandhu JK, Finlay BB, Sad S, Krishnan L. Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium-induced placental inflammation and not bacterial burden correlates with pathology and fatal maternal disease. Infect Immun. 2010 May;78(5):2292–301. 38. Wu S, Lu R, Zhang Y, Sun J. Chronic Salmonella infected mouse model. J Vis Exp JoVE. 2010 May 31;(39). 39. Que JU, Hentges DJ. Effect of streptomycin administration on colonization resistance to Salmonella typhimurium in mice. Infect Immun. 1985 Apr;48(1):169–74. 40. Miller CP, Bohnhoff M. CHANGES IN THE MOUSE’S ENTERIC MICROFLORA ASSOCIATED WITH ENHANCED SUSCEPTIBILITY TO SALMONELLA INFECTION FOLLOWING STREPTOMYCIN TREATMENT. J Infect Dis. 1963 Aug;113:59–66. 41. Hallstrom K, McCormick BA. Salmonella Interaction with and Passage through the Intestinal Mucosa: Through the Lens of the Organism. Front Microbiol. 2011;2:88. 42. Stecher B, Robbiani R, Walker AW, Westendorf AM, Barthel M, Kremer M, et al. Salmonella enterica Serovar Typhimurium Exploits Inflammation to Compete with the Intestinal Microbiota. PLOS Biol. 2007 Aug 28;5(10):e244. 43. Nilsson OR, Kari L, Steele-Mortimer O. Foodborne infection of mice with Salmonella Typhimurium. PLOS ONE. 2019 Aug 8;14(8):e0215190. 44. Mathur R, Oh H, Zhang D, Park S-G, Seo J, Koblansky A, et al. A mouse model of Salmonella typhi infection. Cell. 2012 Oct 26;151(3):590–602. A cc ep te d A rt ic le This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved 45. Fontes KN, Reginatto MW, Silva NL, Andrade CBV, Bloise FF, Monteiro VRS, et al. Dysregulation of placental ABC transporters in a murine model of malaria-induced preterm labor. Sci Rep. 2019 Aug 7;9(1):11488. 46. Raupach B, Peuschel S-K, Monack DM, Zychlinsky A. Caspase-1-Mediated Activation of Interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and IL-18 Contributes to Innate Immune Defenses against Salmonella enterica Serovar Typhimurium Infection. Infect Immun. 2006 Aug;74(8):4922–6. 47. Broz P, Ruby T, Belhocine K, Bouley DM, Kayagaki N, Dixit VM, et al. Caspase-11 increases susceptibility to Salmonella infection in the absence of caspase-1. Nature. 2012 Oct 11;490(7419):288–91. 48. McComb S, Cessford E, Alturki NA, Joseph J, Shutinoski B, Startek JB, et al. Type-I interferon signaling through ISGF3 complex is required for sustained Rip3 activation and necroptosis in macrophages. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Aug 5;111(31):E3206-3213. 49. Agbayani G, Wachholz K, Murphy SP, Sad S, Krishnan L. Type I interferons differentially modulate maternal host immunity to infection by Listeria monocytogenes and Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium during pregnancy. Am J Reprod Immunol N Y N 1989. 2019 Jan;81(1):e13068. 50. Reis AS, Barboza R, Murillo O, Barateiro A, Peixoto EPM, Lima FA, et al. Inflammasome activation and IL-1 signaling during placental malaria induce poor pregnancy outcomes. Sci Adv. 2020 Mar 1;6(10):eaax6346. 51. Broz P, Ohlson MB, Monack DM. Innate immune response to Salmonella typhimurium, a model enteric pathogen. Gut Microbes. 2012 Apr;3(2):62–70. 52. Bao S, Beagley KW, France MP, Shen J, Husband AJ. Interferon-gamma plays a critical role in intestinal immunity against Salmonella typhimurium infection. Immunology. 2000 Mar;99(3):464–72. A cc ep te d A rt ic le This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved 53. Cousens LP, Orange JS, Su HC, Biron CA. Interferon-α/β inhibition of interleukin 12 and interferon-γ production in vitro and endogenously during viral infection. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Jan 21;94(2):634–9. 54. Gutierrez KD, Davis MA, Daniels BP, Olsen TM, Ralli-Jain P, Tait SWG, et al. MLKL Activation Triggers NLRP3-Mediated Processing and Release of IL-1β Independently of Gasdermin-D. J Immunol Baltim Md 1950. 2017 Mar 1;198(5):2156–64. 55. Malireddi RKS, Kanneganti T-D. Role of type I interferons in inflammasome activation, cell death, and disease during microbial infection. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2013;3:77. 56. Gurung P, Malireddi RKS, Anand PK, Demon D, Vande Walle L, Liu Z, et al. Toll or interleukin1 receptor (TIR) domain-containing adaptor inducing interferon-β (TRIF)-mediated caspase-11 protease production integrates Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) proteinand Nlrp3 inflammasomemediated host defense against enteropathogens. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 5;287(41):34474–83. 57. Kayagaki N, Warming S, Lamkanfi M, Vande Walle L, Louie S, Dong J, et al. Non-canonical inflammasome activation targets caspase-11. Nature. 2011 Oct 16;479(7371):117–21. 58. Rathinam VAK, Vanaja SK, Waggoner L, Sokolovska A, Becker C, Stuart LM, et al. TRIF licenses caspase-11-dependent NLRP3 inflammasome activation by gram-negative bacteria. Cell. 2012 Aug 3;150(3):606–19. 59. Zhou F, Li C, Zhang S-Y. NLRP3 inflammasome: a new therapeutic target for high-risk reproductive disorders? Chin Med J (Engl). 2021 Jan 5;134(1):20–7. 60. Gomez-Lopez N, Romero R, Panaitescu B, Leng Y, Xu Y, Tarca AL, et al. Inflammasome activation during spontaneous preterm labor with intra-amniotic infection or sterile intraamniotic inflammation. Am J Reprod Immunol N Y N 1989. 2018 Nov;80(5):e13049. 61. Megli C, Morosky S, Rajasundaram D, Coyne CB. Inflammasome signaling in human placental trophoblasts regulates immune defense against Listeria monocytogenes infection. J Exp Med. 2021 Jan 4;218(1). A cc ep te d A rt ic le This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved 62. Vidal S, Tremblay ML, Govoni G, Gauthier S, Sebastiani G, Malo D, et al. The Ity/Lsh/Bcg locus: natural resistance to infection with intracellular parasites is abrogated by disruption of the Nramp1 gene. J Exp Med. 1995 Sep 1;182(3):655–66. 63. Forbes JR, Gros P. Divalent-metal transport by NRAMP proteins at the interface of host-pathogen interactions. Trends Microbiol. 2001 Aug;9(8):397–403. 64. Valdez Y, Diehl GE, Vallance BA, Grassl GA, Guttman JA, Brown NF, et al. Nramp1 expression by dendritic cells modulates inflammatory responses during Salmonella Typhimurium infection. Cell Microbiol. 2008 Aug;10(8):1646–61. 65. Yockey LJ, Jurado KA, Arora N, Millet A, Rakib T, Milano KM, et al. Type I interferons instigate fetal demise after Zika virus infection. Sci Immunol. 2018 Jan 5;3(19). 66. Cappelletti M, Presicce P, Lawson MJ, Chaturvedi V, Stankiewicz TE, Vanoni S, et al. Type I interferons regulate susceptibility to inflammation-induced preterm birth. JCI Insight. 2017 Mar 9;2(5):e91288. 67. Cardenas I, Mor G, Aldo P, Lang SM, Stabach P, Sharp A, et al. Placental viral infection sensitizes to endotoxin-induced pre-term labor: a double hit hypothesis. Am J Reprod Immunol N Y N 1989. 2011 Feb;65(2):110–7. 68. Racicot K, Cardenas I, Wünsche V, Aldo P, Guller S, Means RE, et al. Viral infection of the pregnant cervix predisposes to ascending bacterial infection. J Immunol Baltim Md 1950. 2013 Jul 15;191(2):934–41. A cc ep te d A rt ic le aji_13454_f1.tif This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved A cc ep te d A rt ic le aji_13454_f2.tif This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved A cc ep te d A rt ic le aji_13454_f3.tif This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved A cc ep te d A rt ic le "
