"t n w e c i a a s o c f i l B A SIC A N D TR A N SLA TIO N A L LIV ER GASTROENTEROLOGY 2012;143:1330–1340Toll-Like Receptor 2–Mediated Intestinal Injury and Enteric Tumor Necrosis Factor Receptor I Contribute to Liver Fibrosis in Mice PHILLIPP HARTMANN, MICHAEL HAIMERL, MAGDALENA MAZAGOVA, DAVID A. BRENNER, and BERND SCHNABLDepartment of Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California g d a d s l t l p c b BACKGROUND & AIMS: Progression of liver fibrosis in experimental models depends on gut-derived bacterial products, but little is known about mechanisms of disruption of the mucosal barrier or translocation. We used a mouse model of cholestatic liver disease to investigate mechanisms of intestinal barrier disruption following liver injury. METHODS: Liver fibrosis and bacterial translocation were assessed in Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2)-deficient and tumor necrosis factor receptor I (TNFRI)-deficient mice subjected to bile duct ligation. Epithelial and lamina propria cells were isolated and analyzed by immunoblot analyses and flow cytometry. We analyzed bone marrow chimeras and mice with a conditional gain-of-function allele for the TNFRI receptor. By crossing TNFRIflxneo/flxneo mice with mice that expressed the VillinCre transgene specifically in intestinal epithelial cells, we created mice that express functional TNFRI specifically on intestinal epithelial cells (VillinCreTNFRIflxneo/flxneo mice). RESULTS: Following bile duct ligaion, TLR2-deficient mice had less liver fibrosis and intestial translocation of bacteria and bacterial products than ild-type mice. Mice with hematopoietic cells that did not xpress TLR2 also had reduced bacterial translocation, indiating that TLR2 expression by hematopoietic cells regulates ntestinal barrier function. The number of TLR2 monocytes that produce tumor necrosis factor  increased in the intestinal lamina propria of wild-type mice following bile duct ligation; bacterial translocation was facilitated by TNFRI-mediated signals on intestinal epithelial cells. CONCLUSIONS: Intestinal inflammation and bacterial translocation contribute to liver fibrosis via TLR2 signaling on monocytes in the lamina propria and TNFRI signaling on intestinal epithelial cells in mice. Therefore, enteric TNFRI is an important mediator of cholestatic liver fibrosis. Keywords: Microbiome; Endotoxin; Intestinal Inflammation; Microbiota Composition. Liver fibrosis is triggered upon chronic liver damagecaused by various etiologies, including viral hepatitis, lcohol abuse, chronic cholestasis, and nonalcoholic stetohepatitis. Fibrosis can progress to cirrhosis as endtage liver disease, which is the 12th most common cause f death in the United States.1 There is an emerging oncept that gut-derived bacterial products resulting rom bacterial translocation play a central role in the nitiation of acute liver injury and progression to chronic iver disease. In rodents, experimental bacterial over-rowth in the intestine induces bacterial translocation, as efined by crossing of viable bacteria or bacterial products cross the intestinal epithelial lining, and subsequent liver amage.2,3 In humans, patients with chronic liver disease how intestinal bacterial overgrowth with bacterial transocation, and severity of liver disease correlates with sysemic levels of endotoxin (or lipopolysaccharide).4 Reducing the intestinal bacterial burden by nonabsorbable antibiotics reduces endotoxemia and improves chronic liver disease in preclinical animal models5,6 and patients.7 Further evidence for the critical involvement of gut-derived bacterial products in liver fibrogenesis comes from genetically modified animals. Mice that are either unresponsive to bacterial products by a deficiency or mutation in Toll-like receptor (TLR)-4 and 96,8 or lack molecules propagating TLR signaling events triggered by bacterial products9,10 are resistant to experimental liver fibrosis. Nevertheless, the exact molecular mechanism of increased intestinal permeability and liver fibrosis is not known. In this study, we used an animal model of cholestatic liver fibrosis to show that TLR2 monocytes in the intestinal amina propria mediate intestinal barrier disruption by roduction of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-. Tumor necrosis factor receptor I (TNFRI) on enterocytes mediates tight junction disruption by activation of the RhoA/myosin II regulatory light chain (MLC) pathway. Materials and Methods Animal Models of Liver Disease TNFRI/11 and transgenic mice expressing green fluoresent protein (GFP) under the control of a -actin promoter6 have een described. TNFRIflxneo/flxneo12 and VillinCreTNFRIflxneo/flxneo13 were kindly provided by Drs Manolis Roulis and George Kollias (Biomedical Sciences Research Center “Alexander Fleming,” Vari, Greece), and littermates were used for the experiments. TLR2deficient mice that were originally purchased from Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME) were rederived by cesarean section and housed in a specific pathogen-free vivarium. All transgenic and knockout mice were on a C57BL/6 genetic background. Agematched male mice on a C57BL/6 genetic background were used for the study except when stated otherwise. All animals received Abbreviations used in this paper: CFU, colony-forming unit; GFP, green fluorescent protein; MLC, myosin II regulatory light chain; TGF, transforming growth factor; TIMP, tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinases; TLR, Toll-like receptor; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; TNFRI, tumor necrosis factor receptor I; ZO, zonula occludens. © 2012 by the AGA Institute 0016-5085/$36.00http://dx.doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2012.07.099 t a c C a G s m a fl v S S s M m i m s b fi T B A SI C A N D TR A N SL A TI O N A L LI V ER November 2012 ENTERIC TNFRI IN LIVER DISEASE 1331humane care in compliance with institutional guidelines. Mice had access to water and irradiated chow diet (PicoLab Rodent Diet 20 5053; LabDiet, Brentwood, MO) ad libitum. Ligation of the common bile duct or sham operation as control has been described.2 One day, 10 days, or 3 weeks after bile duct ligation or sham operation, mice were harvested for analysis. Generation of Bone Marrow Chimeric Mice Recipient mice were lethally irradiated with 1000 rad using a 137Cs source and injected intravenously 2–3 hours later with approximately 5  106 bone marrow cells derived from the ibia and femur of donors as described.14 Eight weeks after engrafting, animal experiments were performed. To assess reconstitution, GFP-expressing transgenic mice under a -actin promoter were used as bone marrow donors with wild-type mice as recipients. Engraftment was assessed by fluorescence-activated cell sorter (FACS) analysis of peripheral blood and isolated intestinal lamina propria cells. After red blood cell lysis, peripheral blood and lamina propria cells were stained with PE-labeled CD45.2 (eBioscience, San Diego, CA). Cell suspensions were analyzed for the presence of intracellular GFP on a BD LSR II (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA). Immunofluorescence was performed on frozen liver sections using anti-GFP (Abcam, Cambridge, MA) and anti-F4/80 (eBioscience) as primary antibodies and fluorescein isothiocyanate– or Texas Red– conjugated as secondary antibodies (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY). Epithelial Cell and Lamina Propria Cell Isolation Intestines of mice were rinsed with cold phosphatebuffered saline, opened longitudinally, and cut into pieces of 1-cm lengths. Intestinal pieces were placed in ice-cold RPMI 1640 medium (Invitrogen) with 5% fetal calf serum containing dithiothreitol (1 mmol/L). After vigorous shaking, the supernatant was discarded and tissue was incubated for 20 minutes in RPMI 1640 with 5% fetal calf serum containing EDTA (1 mmol/L) at 37°C with shaking (250 rpm). This step was repeated for a total of 2 times. Intestinal epithelial cells were collected from supernatant after the first incubation. For lamina propria cell isolation, tissue was further incubated in RPMI 1640 with 5% fetal calf serum containing collagenase type VIII (Sigma, St. Louis, MO; 1 mg/mL) for 30 minutes at 37°C with shaking (250 rpm). Cell suspension was sieved through a cell strainer (100 m; BD Biosciences). Lamina propria cells were collected by centrifugation; stained with CD45.2, CD11b, TLR2, Lys6C, Lys6G, CD11c, F4/80, interleukin-6, or TNF- (all eBiosciences); nd analyzed by fluorescence-activated cell sorting. Intracellular ytokine staining was performed using the BD Cytofix/ ytoperm kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Bacterial Cultures To assess for bacterial translocation, mesenteric lymph nodes were harvested in a sterile fashion and cultured on blood agar plates (containing 5% sheep blood) for total bacteria as described.2,15 Plates were incubated for 48 –72 hours at 37oC in aerobic conditions, followed by the counting of colony-forming units (CFUs). To assess bacterial translocation from gastrointestinal segments, we used an intestinal loop model as we have previously described.2,14,16 Escherichia coli serotype O74:K:H39 isolated from patient with peritonitis (ATCC #23535) was transfected with a FP-expressing plasmid, which conferred chloramphenicol re-istance.17 After anesthesia, a midline laparotomy incision was dmade. A 4-cm-long segment of the gastrointestinal tract (proximal, mid, or distal small intestine, cecum, or colon) was created with 2 vascular hemoclips without disrupting the mesenteric vascular arcades. The length of intestine between the 2 clips was injected with approximately 106 CFUs. After 4 hours, mice were sacrificed and mesenteric lymph nodes were cultured on nutrient broth agar plates (containing chloramphenicol 20 g/mL). GFP-expressing CFUs were counted after 48 –72 hours using fluorescence microscopy. The number of translocated CFUs was adjusted for the total number of bacteria injected and expressed as CFUs per 1  106 injected bacteria. Protein Expression Analysis Formalin-fixed liver samples were embedded in paraffin and stained with Sirius red to assess fibrosis. The Sirius red– positive area was measured at a final magnification of 40. The entire median lobe of the liver was imaged using a polarizing filter and analyzed using National Institutes of Health ImageJ as described.18 Results are expressed relative to wild-type control ice. Frozen intestinal sections were stained using anti-occludin, nti–claudin-4, and anti–zonula occludens (ZO)-1 antibodies and a uorescein isothiocyanate–conjugated secondary antibody (all Initrogen) as described.2 Nuclei were stained with Hoechst (blue). Control sections were stained with an isotype antibody instead of the primary antibody and showed no staining. Western blot analysis was performed as described15 using anti–phospho-MLC (Cell ignaling, Danvers, MA), anti-RhoA (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, anta Cruz, CA), anti-tubulin (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) or anti– -actin (Sigma) antibodies. Western blots were quantitated using National Institutes of Health ImageJ. Alanine aminotransferase levels were measured as described.15 TNF- was measured in the plasma using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (eBioscience) with a detection limit 3.9 pg/mL. Statistical Analysis Mann–Whitney rank sum test was used for statistical analysis. All data are presented as mean  SEM. P  .05 was elected as the level of significance. Other materials and methods are described in Supplementary aterials and Methods. Results TLR2-Deficient Mice Are Protected From Cholestatic Liver Fibrosis TLR2 is the receptor for products from gram-positive bacteria such as peptidoglycan. Conflicting results about the importance of TLR2 in experimental liver injury and fibrosis have been reported. Although one study reported increased survival and protection from liver injury of TLR2-deficient mice following bile duct ligation for up to 30 days,19 another report showed no difference in bile duct ligation–induced liver fibrosis.6 Because the phenotype in experimental disease odels changes with the intestinal microflora20 and to elimnate potential opportunistic pathogens present in these ice, TLR2-deficient mice were rederived and housed in a pecific pathogen-free environment. Mice were subjected to ile duct ligation as a common model for cholestatic liver brosis. Following bile duct ligation for 10 days or 3 weeks, LR2/ mice showed reduced fibrogenesis as evidenced by ecreased hepatic gene expression of collagen 1(I) as coma g ( t a n t c m l B A SIC A N D TR A N SLA TIO N A L LIV ER 1332 HARTMANN ET AL GASTROENTEROLOGY Vol. 143, No. 5pared with wild-type C57BL/6 control mice (Figure 1A and B). TLR2-deficient mice had a reduction in fibrosis as measured by Sirius red staining (Figure 1C and D). This was ssociated with decreased expression of fibrosis-related enes, such as tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinases TIMP)-1 and transforming growth factor (TGF)-1 as poent profibrogenic cytokines (Figure 1E and F). Liver injury s measured by systemic alanine aminotransferase levels was ot significantly different in wild-type and TLR2/ mice 1 day or 3 weeks following bile duct ligation (Supplementary Figure 1), indicating that TLR2 does not mediate cholestatic hepatotoxicity but fibrosis progression. Reduced hepatic fibrosis in TLR2/ mice was confirmed in a second model of oxic liver injury and fibrosis using chronic injections of arbon tetrachloride (Supplementary Figure 2). Translocation of Bacteria and Their Products Is Abolished in TLR2/ Mice Following Bile Duct Ligation Liver fibrosis is believed to be promoted by trans-location of bacteria or their products from the gut to the cportal and systemic circulation.6,8 We therefore investigated whether TLR2 is involved in regulating intestinal barrier function and bacterial translocation following the onset of liver injury and fibrosis. As a measure of bacterial translocation across the mucosal barrier, viable bacteria were quantified in mesenteric lymph nodes as the first organ encountered in the translocation route from the gastrointestinal tract to the portal vein. TLR2/ mice showed significantly less positive mesenteric lymph node cultures as compared with wild-type mice following bile duct ligation for 1 day (Figure 2A). Significantly lower systemic endotoxin levels were found in TLR2/ mice following bile duct ligation for 1 day or 3 weeks as compared with wild-type mice (Figure 2B and C). To determine the gastrointestinal site of bacterial translocation in vivo, a ligated intestinal loop model was used as previously described by us.2,14 A 4-cm loop of the proxial, mid, or distal small intestine, cecum, or colon was igated (without disrupting the mesenteric vascular arFigure 1. Diminished hepatic fibrosis in TLR2/ mice. Wild type and TLR2/ mice underwent sham operation (n  4) or bile duct ligation (BDL; n  8–13) for indicated time periods. (A and B) Collagen 1(I) messenger RNA expression was assessed in the liver using quantitative polymerase chain reaction. (C and D) Hepatic fibrosis was assessed by Sirius red staining and quantified using morphometric analysis. Scale bar  50 m. (E and F) Hepatic TIMP-1 and TGF-1 messenger RNA levels were determined by quantitative polymerase chain reaction. *P  .05.ades and blood supply) in anesthetized mice that had w c a p i t m m f n o t b ( e l e i m B M i t f s fl i c ( c w a B A SI C A N D TR A N SL A TI O N A L LI V ER November 2012 ENTERIC TNFRI IN LIVER DISEASE 1333undergone sham operations or bile duct ligation 1 day before, and viable GFP-expressing E coli were injected. At 4 hours, mice were harvested, mesenteric lymph nodes cultured, and translocated bacteria counted using fluorescent microscopy. The large intestine and in particular the colon showed a significant increase in translocated E coli (Figure 2D and E). This is consistent with our study demonstrating that the colon shows the largest increase in intestinal permeability following 1 day of bile duct ligation.2 Translocation of GFP-expressing E coli from colonic loops to mesenteric lymph nodes was markedly attenuated in TLR2-deficient mice as compared with wildtype mice, suggesting that TLR2 is involved in regulation of the intestinal barrier function (Figure 2F). TLR2-Mediated Signaling in Hematopoietic Cells Is Required for Bacterial Translocation Following Cholestatic Liver Injury To investigate whether innate immune signaling in hematopoietic or nonhematopoietic cells mediates bacterial translocation following liver injury, we generated Figure 2. TLR2/ mice show less bacterial translocation following ligation of the common bile duct. (A) Aerobic bacteria were cultured and quantified in mesenteric lymph nodes (MLN; n  10–12). (B and C) Plasma endotoxin was measured (n  4 for sham, n  8–21 for bile duct igation [BDL]). (D and E) GFPxpressing E coli were injected nto intestinal loops of BALB/c ice that underwent sham or DL operations 1 day before. LN were cultured 4 hours after njection (D; n  4 for small intesine, n  17 for cecum, n  28 or colon). Positive cultures howed GFP expression using uorescence microscopy. An mage with GFP-expressing E oli as positive control is shown E). (F) Translocation of GFP-E oli from colonic loops to MLN as assessed in wild type (n  4) nd TLR2/ mice (n  5) 1 day after BDL. *P  .05.bone marrow chimeric mice in which donor and/or recipeients were either wild type or TLR2 deficient. To confirm successful bone marrow transplantation, control animals were transplanted with bone marrow cells from mice expressing GFP under a -actin promoter and studied 8 eeks after transplantation. Mice were found to be fully himerized in peripheral blood, colonic lamina propria, nd liver, as assessed 1 day after bile duct ligation (Suplementary Figure 3A and B). To determine the impact of TLR2-mediated signaling n hematopoietic or nonhematopoietic cells on bacterial ranslocation, mesenteric lymph nodes from chimeric ice were cultured 1 day after bile duct ligation. Chimeric ice lacking TLR2 on hematopoietic cells were protected rom translocation of bacteria to the mesenteric lymph odes. In contrast, transplant recipients expressing TLR2 n hematopoietic cells showed bacteria translocated to he mesenteric lymph nodes, regardless of whether the one marrow recipient was wild type or TLR2 deficient Figure 3A). Similarly, plasma endotoxin levels were lowst in transplant recipients lacking TLR2 on hematopoitic cells (Figure 3B). These findings indicate that TLR2 B A SIC A N D TR A N SLA TIO N A L LIV ER 1334 HARTMANN ET AL GASTROENTEROLOGY Vol. 143, No. 5Figure 3. Bacterial translocation is dependent on TLR2 signals from hematopoietic cells. (A and B) CFUs were counted of mesenteric lymph node cultures (n  8–23), and plasma endotoxin (n  4–15) was measured in wild-type and TLR2 bone marrow chimeric mice 1 day after bile duct ligation (BDL). (C) TLR2, intracellular TNF- (n  4–5 independent experiments), and TLR2, IL-6 expression (n  3 independent experiments) of CD45.2, CD11b, Lys6C cells were assessed in colonic lamina propria of wild-type mice. Lamina propria cells from 3 mice were pooled in each independent experiment. (D) RhoA, phospho-MLC, and tubulin expression was assessed in isolated colon epithelial cells in wild-type and TLR2/ mice. A representative Western blot is shown. (E) Occludin, claudin-4, and ZO-1 protein expression in intestinal sections of wild-type and TLR2/ mice were analyzed by immunofluorescence and Western blot analysis. Representative fluorescent images of 3–4 independent experiments are shown. Scale bar  1 m. *P  .05. m p a M M i ( p b i t w l w b i p t T l p g d a f a t b T d C p c p f B A SI C A N D TR A N SL A TI O N A L LI V ER November 2012 ENTERIC TNFRI IN LIVER DISEASE 1335expression on hematopoietic cells mediates bacterial translocation following cholestatic liver injury. TNF-–Expressing TLR2 Monocytes in the Colonic Lamina Propria Disrupt Epithelial Tight Junctions, Resulting in Bacterial Translocation Several studies show that intestinal inflammation caused by inflammatory cells in the lamina propria is involved in increasing intestinal permeability leading to translocation of bacteria or their products.21,22 It is therefore possible that TLR2-mediated signals in cells from the mucosal innate immune system are required for the paracellular leakage pathway in the intestine. We therefore focused on the lamina propria cell infiltrate in the colon because the colon had the largest rate of bacterial translocation and increase in intestinal permeability (Figure 2D). TNF- is a known downstream target of TLR2 in monocytes and macrophages,23 and it increases the pereability of the tight junction barrier in the intestine.24 We found that the number of infiltrating TLR2 and TNF monocytes (Figure 3C), but not TLR2 and TNF macrophages, dendritic cells, or neutrophils (Suplementary Figure 4A–C), significantly increased 12 hours fter bile duct ligation. The percentage of TLR2 monocytes expressing interleukin-6 as another proinflammatory cytokine was unchanged 12 hours after bile duct ligation as compared with sham operation (Figure 3C). In contrast to a local secretion of TNF-, it is also conceivable that systemic TNF- is elevated in response to cholestatic liver injury. However, plasma TNF- levels were below the detection limit, both in sham and bile duct– ligated animals 12 hours after surgery (Supplementary Figure 4D). TNF- has been reported to activate RhoA or LC kinase with a subsequent phosphorylation of LC.25–27 The degree of MLC activation correlates with local disease activity in patients with inflammatory bowel disease, suggesting that MLC may be regulated by local cytokine signaling rather than systemically.28 Colonic epithelial cells isolated from C57BL/6 mice that have undergone bile duct ligation showed higher protein levels of RhoA and more MLC phosphorylation, a downstream target of RhoA, compared with sham-operated mice. This increase in RhoA activation and MLC phosphorylation was blunted in epithelial cells isolated from the colon of TLR2/ mice following bile duct ligation (Figure 3D and Supplementary Figure 5A). However, no increase in the gene expression or phosphorylation of MLC kinase was observed in isolated colonic enterocytes following various time intervals of bile duct ligation (not shown). Although subsequent molecular events that cause increased intestinal permeability following phosphorylation of MLC are less clear, changes in tight junction protein expression such as occludin are essential effectors of the paracellular leakage pathway.21,29 Therefore, the integrity of tight junction proteins of colonic epithelial cells was investigated using immunofluorescence and confirmed by Western blotting. Following 1 day of cholestatic liver injury, stain-ing for occludin protein was diminished as compared with sham-operated wild-type animals, as we have reported previously.2 Occludin expression was unchanged n the colon of TLR2-deficient mice after bile duct ligation Figure 3E and Supplementary Figure 5B). Similarly, exression of claudin-4 and ZO-1 was decreased 1 day after ile duct ligation in wild-type mice but not in TLR2/ mice (Figure 3E and Supplementary Figure 5B). We also nvestigated whether increased cell death of colonic enerocytes might contribute to bacterial translocation, but e did not find a significant increase in apoptosis of the ining epithelial cells between sham and bile duct–ligated ild-type mice after 1 day (not shown). Taken together, acterial translocation occurs following cholestatic liver njury and is facilitated by a disruption of tight junction roteins that involves a TLR2-induced TNF- secretion in lamina propria monocytes activating the RhoA/MLC pathway in enterocytes. TNFRI-Deficient Mice Are Protected From Liver Fibrosis and Show Decreased Bacterial Translocation To further define the role of TNF- in mediating ight junction disruption following liver injury, we used NFRI-deficient mice and subjected them to bile duct igation. TNFRI/, but not TNFR2/, mice show decreased hepatic fibrogenesis after 4 days of bile duct ligation.30 Consistent with this report, TNFRI/ mice were rotected from liver fibrosis as shown by decreased collaen (I) gene expression and deposition of extracellular matrix proteins following bile duct ligation for 3 weeks (Figure 4A–C). Hepatic gene expression of TIMP-1 and TGF-1 was also lower in TNFRI/ mice following bile uct ligation as compared with C57BL/6 mice (Figure 4D nd E). Liver injury as measured by alanine aminotranserase levels was not significantly different in wild-type nd TNFRI/ mice 1 day or 3 weeks after bile duct ligation, consistent with previous studies31,32 (Supplemenary Figure 1). Moreover, bacterial translocation of viable acteria to the mesenteric lymph nodes was abrogated in NFRI/ mice as compared with C57BL/6 mice after 1 day of cholestatic liver injury. Inhibition of bacterial translocation did not require TNFRI-mediated signals on hematopoietic cells but instead was required in nonhematopoietic cells, presumably in intestinal epithelial cells, as shown by bone marrow transplantation (Figure 5A). Translocation of endotoxin to the systemic circulation was similarly abolished in TNFRI/ mice following bile uct ligation for 1 day or 3 weeks (Figure 5B and C). onsistent with decreased bacterial translocation, RhoA rotein levels and MLC phosphorylation were not inreased (Figure 5D). Expression of the tight junction comonents occludin, claudin-4, and ZO-1 remained intact ollowing bile duct ligation in TNFRI/ mice (Figure 5E). Thus, TNFRI on nonhematologic cells mediates bacterial translocation following cholestatic liver injury. T v l l T a T c t V s o V b T l u V B A SIC A N D TR A N SLA TIO N A L LIV ER 1336 HARTMANN ET AL GASTROENTEROLOGY Vol. 143, No. 5TNFRI-Deficient Mice With Reactivation of TNFRI on Intestinal Epithelial Cells Lose Their Protection Against Bile Duct Ligation– Induced Liver Fibrosis To confirm the intestinal epithelial cell–specific function of TNFRI in mediating bacterial translocation in liver fibrosis, we used mutant mice carrying a conditional gainof-function allele for this receptor with an introduced loxP-flanked neomycin-resistance cassette in intron 5 of the murine p55TnfR gene (TNFRIflxneo/flxneo).12 A nonfunctional NFRI allele is engineered to be reactivated specifically in illin-expressing intestinal epithelial cells by a Villin CreoxP–mediated recombination (VillinCreTNFRIflxneo/flxneo).12 By crossing TNFRIflxneo/flxneo mice with the intestinal epitheial cell–specific VillinCre transgenic mouse, a functional NFRI is selectively expressed on intestinal epithelial cells, as nalyzed by polymerase chain reaction.13 We confirmed the selective reactivation on isolated colonic epithelial cells (Figure 6A). TNFRIflxneo/flxneo mice carrying a mutation inNFRI are protected from tight junction disruption in theolon, while wild-type mice show diminished expression of ight junction proteins 1 day after bile duct ligation. illinCreTNFRIflxneo/flxneo mice that have a functional TNFRI electively on intestinal epithelial cells show a disruption f tight junction proteins (Supplementary Figure 6). illinCreTNFRIflxneo/flxneo mice lose their protection against ile duct ligation–induced liver fibrosis as compared with NFRIflxneo/flxneo. However, they still develop significantly less iver fibrosis as compared with C57BL/6 wild-type mice (Figre 6B and C). In addition, endotoxin levels were higher in illinCreTNFRIflxneo/flxneo as compared with TNFRIflxneo/flxneo mice but lower as compared with C57BL/6 wild-type mice (Figure 6D). In summary, TNFRI on intestinal epithelial cells contributes to the paracellular leakage pathway, resulting in bacterial translocation and liver fibrogenesis. Discussion Bacterial translocation is a well-characterized phenomenon in patients with liver disease.4 Although experFigure 4. TNFRI/ mice are protected from liver fibrosis after bile duct ligation. Wild-type and TNFRI/ mice underwent sham operation (n  4) or bile duct ligation (BDL; n  9–13) (A) Hepatic collagen 1(I) messenger RNA was measured by quantitative polymerase chain reaction. (B and C) Collagen deposition was evaluated by Sirius red staining and quantitated by image analysis. Scale bar  50 m. (D and E) Hepatic TIMP-1 and TGF-1 gene expression were assessed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction. *P  .05.imental studies suggest that progression of liver disease, n s i i b i c m s s fl n e t 7 i ( b R l i i I l b s o w t 3 a B A SI C A N D TR A N SL A TI O N A L LI V ER November 2012 ENTERIC TNFRI IN LIVER DISEASE 1337particularly progression of fibrosis, is dependent on gutderived bacterial products,6,8 –10 the molecular mechaisms leading to a leaky gut barrier are unknown. Our tudy provides important insights into changes of the ntestinal barrier function associated with cholestatic liver njury that result in bacterial translocation and liver firosis. Following cholestatic liver injury, TLR2-expressing nflammatory monocytes in the lamina propria of the olon produce and secrete TNF-. TNFRI on enterocytes activates the RhoA/MLC pathway, ultimately resulting in a disruption of tight junctions. We hypothesize that bacteria and their products33 translocate across the mucosal barrier, reach the liver via the portal circulation, and Figure 5. TNFRI on nonhematopoietic cells mediates bacterial translocation. (A) Aerobic bacteria were cultured and quantified in mesenteric lymph nodes (n  –10). (B and C) Endotoxin levels n the plasma were measured n  4 for sham, n  6–10 for ile duct ligation [BDL]). (D) hoA, phospho-MLC, and tubuin expression were analyzed in solated epithelial cells from the ntestine by Western blotting. mages are representative of at east 4 independent Western lots. (E) Immunofluorescent taining or Western blotting for ccludin, claudin-4, and ZO-1 as performed on colonic secions. Representative images of –4 independent experiments re shown. Scale bar  1 m. *P  .05.enhance liver fibrosis (Figure 7). Taken together, this isthe first study functionally linking an intestinal gene to progression of liver fibrosis in vivo. TNF- levels produced by monocytes are increased in esenteric lymph nodes, indicative of an immune reponse to enteric bacteria in rats with cirrhosis. Nonaborbable antibiotics, which reduce the intestinal microora and bacterial translocation to mesenteric lymph odes, attenuate the expansion of monocytes in the mesnteric lymph nodes and normalize TNF- in the meseneric lymph nodes.34 Most interestingly, bacterial translocation is reduced in cirrhotic rats treated with anti–TNF- antibodies.35 These findings support a role for TNF- in the disruption of the intestinal barrier and in intestinal leakiness. t e l s o q T i t fi t t l i p h o l t l c a t t i a p B A SIC A N D TR A N SLA TIO N A L LIV ER 1338 HARTMANN ET AL GASTROENTEROLOGY Vol. 143, No. 5We demonstrate that enteric TNFRI mediates bacterial translocation in early stages after cholestasis. We show that MLC as a downstream target of RhoA activation is phosphorylated following cholestatic liver injury. MLC is activated and plays a central role as a common final pathway of barrier disruption in response to TNF- in enterocytes.21 Although bacterial translocation is reduced o baseline in early stages of cholestatic liver disease, ndotoxin levels are higher in TNFRI-deficient mice folowing 3 weeks of bile duct ligation as compared with ham-operated mice. This indicates that later in disease, ther pathways contribute to gut leakiness and subseuent bacterial translocation. This might include NFR2 or other cytokines and their receptors such as nterleukin-1 or interferon gamma, which are known to play a role in the regulation of tight junction permeability.21 Similar to bacterial translocation, reactivaion of TNFRI specifically on enterocytes increases liver brosis as compared with mice deficient in TNFRI, but he degree of fibrosis is still lower compared with wildype mice. TNF- regulates proliferation and extracelular matrix production in hepatic stellate cells by bindng to TNFRI,30 which might account for differences inthe fibrogenic response. dThe question remains: how is TNFRI on enterocytes activated? We have no evidence that systemic TNF- possibly coming from the injured liver reaches the TNFRI receptor on enterocytes via the bloodstream to cause tight junction disruption, because TNF- was undetectable in lasma early after bile duct ligation. Our experiments, owever, established that TLR2 monocytes, but not ther inflammatory cells, are activated locally in the amina propria of the colon to secrete TNF- and disrupt the tight junction barrier. We have previously reported a rapid onset of increased intestinal permeability and intestinal bacterial overgrowth along the entire intestinal tract following bile duct ligation.2 It is herefore conceivable that an abundance of bacterial igands in the intestinal lumen results also in a higher oncentration of TLR2 ligands in the lamina propria to ctivate these cells and to cause intestinal inflammaion. It is less likely that the monocytes are activated in he liver and migrate to the lamina propria to cause ntestinal inflammation and initiate a paracellular leakge pathway. TLR2 is expressed on Kupffer cells (Suplementary Figure 7), and future studies need to adFigure 6. Reactivation of TNFRI on intestinal epithelial cells contributes to liver fibrosis. (A) Reactivation of TNFRI on isolated colonic epithelial in VillinCreTNFRIflxneo/flxneo was analyzed by polymerase chain reaction (left panel). Tails from respective mice served as controls (right panel). (B–D) Wildtype, TNFRIflxneo/flxneo, and VillinCreTNFRIflxneo/flxneo mice underwent sham operation (n  3–4) or bile duct ligation (BDL; n  6 for C57BL/6, n  9–10 for TNFRIflxneo/flxneo and for VillinCreTNFRIflxneo/flxneo mice). (B and C) Collagen deposition was evaluated by Sirius red staining and quantitated by image analysis. Scale bar  50 m. (D) Plasma endotoxin levels were measured. *P  .05.ress its contribution to liver fibrogenesis. d 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 l s li B A SI C A N D TR A N SL A TI O N A L LI V ER November 2012 ENTERIC TNFRI IN LIVER DISEASE 1339Our study shows that intestinal TNFRI functionally contributes to cholestatic liver fibrosis by increasing intestinal permeability and facilitating translocation of bacterial products. Our findings are consistent with the large body of evidence that chronic liver disease and in particular liver fibrogenesis is driven by the gut, emphasizing the importance of the gut-liver axis. Treatment targeting intestinal inflammation and bacterial translocation might contribute to the clinical management of patients with chronic liver disease. Supplementary Material Note: To access the supplementary material accompanying this article visit the online version of Gastroenterology at www.gastrojournal.org and at http:// x.doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2012.07.099. References 1. Minino AM, Heron MP, Murphy SL, et al. Deaths: final data for 2004. Natl Vital Stat Rep 2007;55:1–119. 2. Fouts DE, Torralba M, Nelson KE, et al. Bacterial translocation and changes in the intestinal microbiome in mouse models of liver disease. J Hepatol 2012;56:1283–1292. 3. Lichtman SN, Sartor RB, Keku J, et al. Hepatic inflammation in rats with experimental small intestinal bacterial overgrowth. Gastroenterology 1990;98:414–423. 4. Lin RS, Lee FY, Lee SD, et al. Endotoxemia in patients with chronic liver diseases: relationship to severity of liver diseases, presence of esophageal varices, and hyperdynamic circulation. J Hepatol 1995;22:165–172. 5. Enomoto N, Ikejima K, Bradford B, et al. Alcohol causes both tolerance and sensitization of rat Kupffer cells via mechanisms Figure 7. Proposed model of bacterial translocation in cholestatic liver d amina propria are activated and produce TNF-. TNF- binds to TNFR of tight junctions. Bacteria and bacterial products such as lipopolysac circulation. LPS binds to TLR4 on hepatic stellate cells (HSC) and causedependent on endotoxin. Gastroenterology 1998;115:443–451.6. Seki E, De Minicis S, Osterreicher CH, et al. TLR4 enhances TGF-beta signaling and hepatic fibrosis. Nat Med 2007;13:1324– 1332. 7. Cirera I, Bauer TM, Navasa M, et al. Bacterial translocation of enteric organisms in patients with cirrhosis. J Hepatol 2001;34: 32–37. 8. Gabele E, Muhlbauer M, Dorn C, et al. Role of TLR9 in hepatic stellate cells and experimental liver fibrosis. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2008;376:271–276. 9. Hritz I, Mandrekar P, Velayudham A, et al. The critical role of toll-like receptor (TLR) 4 in alcoholic liver disease is independent of the common TLR adapter MyD88. Hepatology 2008;48:1224– 1231. 0. Isayama F, Hines IN, Kremer M, et al. LPS signaling enhances hepatic fibrogenesis caused by experimental cholestasis in mice. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2006;290:G1318– G1328. 1. Inokuchi S, Aoyama T, Miura K, et al. Disruption of TAK1 in hepatocytes causes hepatic injury, inflammation, fibrosis, and carcinogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010;107:844–849. 2. Victoratos P, Lagnel J, Tzima S, et al. FDC-specific functions of p55TNFR and IKK2 in the development of FDC networks and of antibody responses. Immunity 2006;24:65–77. 3. Roulis M, Armaka M, Manoloukos M, et al. Intestinal epithelial cells as producers but not targets of chronic TNF suffice to cause murine Crohn-like pathology. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011;108: 5396–5401. 4. Brandl K, Plitas G, Mihu CN, et al. Vancomycin-resistant enterococci exploit antibiotic-induced innate immune deficits. Nature 2008;455:804–807. 5. Yan AW, Fouts DE, Brandl J, et al. Enteric dysbiosis associated with a mouse model of alcoholic liver disease. Hepatology 2011; 53:96–105. 6. Brandl K, Plitas G, Schnabl B, et al. MyD88-mediated signals induce the bactericidal lectin RegIII gamma and protect mice against intestinal Listeria monocytogenes infection. J Exp Med ase. Following cholestatic liver injury, TLR2 monocytes of the intestinal enterocytes to activate the RhoA/MLC pathway, resulting in disruption aride (LPS) cross the mucosal barrier to reach the liver via the portal ver fibrosis.ise I on ch2007;204:1891–1900. 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 B A SIC A N D TR A N SLA TIO N A L LIV ER 1340 HARTMANN ET AL GASTROENTEROLOGY Vol. 143, No. 517. Guzman LM, Belin D, Carson MJ, et al. Tight regulation, modulation, and high-level expression by vectors containing the arabinose PBAD promoter. J Bacteriol 1995;177:4121–4130. 8. Iwaisako K, Haimerl M, Paik YH, et al. Protection from liver fibrosis by a peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor delta agonist. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012;109:E1369–E1376. 9. Yin D, Zhang X, Xie N, et al. TLR2 promotes hepatocyte and cholangiocyte apoptosis via a p38-dependent mechanism (abstr). Hepatology 2009;50:623A. 0. Vijay-Kumar M, Aitken JD, Carvalho FA, et al. Metabolic syndrome and altered gut microbiota in mice lacking Toll-like receptor 5. Science 2010;328:228–231. 1. Turner JR. Intestinal mucosal barrier function in health and disease. Nat Rev Immunol 2009;9:799–809. 2. Barreau F, Madre C, Meinzer U, et al. Nod2 regulates the host response towards microflora by modulating T cell function and epithelial permeability in mouse Peyer’s patches. Gut 2010; 59:207–217. 3. Moresco EM, LaVine D, Beutler B. Toll-like receptors. Curr Biol 2011;21:R488–R493. 4. Taylor CT, Dzus AL, Colgan SP. Autocrine regulation of epithelial permeability by hypoxia: role for polarized release of tumor necrosis factor alpha. Gastroenterology 1998;114:657–668. 5. McKenzie JA, Ridley AJ. Roles of Rho/ROCK and MLCK in TNFalpha-induced changes in endothelial morphology and permeability. J Cell Physiol 2007;213:221–228. 6. Clayburgh DR, Barrett TA, Tang Y, et al. Epithelial myosin light chain kinase-dependent barrier dysfunction mediates T cell activation-induced diarrhea in vivo. J Clin Invest 2005;115:2702– 2715. 7. Zolotarevsky Y, Hecht G, Koutsouris A, et al. A membrane-permeant peptide that inhibits MLC kinase restores barrier function in in vitro models of intestinal disease. Gastroenterology 2002; 123:163–172. 8. Blair SA, Kane SV, Clayburgh DR, et al. Epithelial myosin light chain kinase expression and activity are upregulated in inflammatory bowel disease. Lab Invest 2006;86:191–201. 9. Shen L, Black ED, Witkowski ED, et al. Myosin light chain phosphorylation regulates barrier function by remodeling tight junction structure. J Cell Sci 2006;119:2095–2106. 0. Tarrats N, Moles A, Morales A, et al. Critical role of tumor necrosis factor receptor 1, but not 2, in hepatic stellate cell proliferation, extracellular matrix remodeling, and liver fibrogenesis. Hepatology 2011;54:319–327.31. Simeonova PP, Gallucci RM, Hulderman T, et al. The role of tumor necrosis factor-alpha in liver toxicity, inflammation, and fibrosis induced by carbon tetrachloride. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2001; 177:112–120. 32. Sudo K, Yamada Y, Moriwaki H, et al. Lack of tumor necrosis factor receptor type 1 inhibits liver fibrosis induced by carbon tetrachloride in mice. Cytokine 2005;29:236–244. 33. Kaser A, Ludwiczek O, Waldenberger P, et al. Endotoxin and its binding proteins in chronic liver disease: the effect of transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunting. Liver 2002;22:380–387. 34. Munoz L, Albillos A, Nieto M, et al. Mesenteric Th1 polarization and monocyte TNF-alpha production: first steps to systemic inflammation in rats with cirrhosis. Hepatology 2005;42:411–419. 35. Frances R, Chiva M, Sanchez E, et al. Bacterial translocation is downregulated by anti-TNF-alpha monoclonal antibody administration in rats with cirrhosis and ascites. J Hepatol 2007;46:797– 803. Received April 2, 2012. Accepted July 16, 2012. Reprint requests Address requests for reprints to: Bernd Schnabl, MD, Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego, MC0702, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, California 92093. e-mail: beschnabl@ucsd. edu; fax: (858) 822-5370. Acknowledgments The authors thank Dr Keiko Iwaisako for assistance with intestinal loops; Drs Jerrold Turner, Alan Hofmann, and Reiner Wiest for helpful discussion; and the Flow Cytometry Research Core Facility of the VA San Diego Healthcare System, the San Diego Center for AIDS Research (AI 36214), and the VA Research Center for AIDS & HIV Infection. Conflicts of interest The authors disclose no conflicts. Funding Supported in part by National Institutes of Health grants K08 DK081830 and R01 AA020703 (to B.S.), the UCSD Digestive Diseases Research Development Center (DK080506 to B.S.), and the AGA Fellowship to Faculty Transition Award (to B.S.). i m s November 2012 ENTERIC TNFRI IN LIVER DISEASE 1340.e1Supplementary Materials and Methods Animal Models of Liver Disease and Isolation of Liver Cells Mice were treated with carbon tetrachloride (2 L/g body wt; 1:4 dilution with corn oil) or corn oil as control (2 L/g body wt) by intraperitoneal injections 3 times per week. Injections were repeated for a total of 12 times.1 Livers were harvested 2 days following the last njection. Isolation of liver cell fractions from normal ouse liver using magnetic cell sorting has been decribed.1 Endotoxin Assay All material used for harvesting blood and measuring endotoxin was pyrogen free. An end point chromogenic Limulus amebocyte lysate (LAL) endotoxin kit (Lonza, Basel, Switzerland) was used according to the manufacturer’s protocol. To adjust for the intrinsic color of plasma, plasma was diluted 1:10 and the absorbance of each sample was measured before the incubation with the test substrates and subtracted from the final absor-bance. Results are expressed relative to wild-type control mice. RNA Analysis RNA was extracted from liver using TRIzol (Invitrogen). RNA was digested with deoxyribonuclease using the DNA-free kit (Ambion, Grand Island, NY) and reverse transcribed using the High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription kit (ABI, New York, NY). Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction was performed with SYBR Green using primer sequences obtained from National Institutes of Health qPrimerDepot.2 Supplementary References 1. Iwaisako K, Haimerl M, Paik YH, et al. Protection from liver fibrosis by a peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor delta agonist. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012;109:E1369–E1376. 2. Yan AW, Fouts DE, Brandl J, et al. Enteric dysbiosis associated with a mouse model of alcoholic liver disease. Hepatology 2011; 53:96–105. "
