"Accepted Manuscript Increased Expression of DUOX2 is an Epithelial Response to Mucosal Dysbiosis Required for Immune Homeostasis in Mouse Intestine Helmut Grasberger, Jun Gao, Hiroko Nagao-Kitamoto, Sho Kitamoto, Min Zhang, Nobuhiko Kamada, Kathryn A. Eaton, Mohamad El-Zaatari, Andrew B. Shreiner, Juanita L. Merchant, Chung Owyang, John Y. Kao PII: S0016-5085(15)01095-1 DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2015.07.062 Reference: YGAST 59953 To appear in: Gastroenterology Accepted Date: 31 July 2015 Please cite this article as: Grasberger H, Gao J, Nagao-Kitamoto H, Kitamoto S, Zhang M, Kamada N, Eaton KA, El-Zaatari M, Shreiner AB, Merchant JL, Owyang C, Kao JY, Increased Expression of DUOX2 is an Epithelial Response to Mucosal Dysbiosis Required for Immune Homeostasis in Mouse Intestine, Gastroenterology (2015), doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2015.07.062. This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. All studies published in Gastroenterology are embargoed until 3PM ET of the day they are published as corrected proofs on-line. Studies cannot be publicized as accepted manuscripts or uncorrected proofs. M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 1 Basic and Translational Alimentary Tract Increased Expression of DUOX2 is an Epithelial Response to Mucosal Dysbiosis Required for Immune Homeostasis in Mouse Intestine Short Title:DUOX2 supports intestinal immune homeostasis Helmut Grasberger1*, Jun Gao1, Hiroko Nagao-Kitamoto1, Sho Kitamoto1, Min Zhang1, Nobuhiko Kamada1, Kathryn A. Eaton2, Mohamad El-Zaatari1, Andrew B. Shreiner1, Juanita L. Merchant1, Chung Owyang1, John Y. Kao1* Division of Gastroenterology1, Department of Internal Medicine, Unit for Laboratory Animal Medicine2, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA Grant Support: This study was supported by the National Institutes of Health grants RO1DK087708-01 (J.Y.K.) and RO1DK055732-15 (J.L.M.), a JSPS Postdoctoral Fellow for Research Abroad (S. K. and H. N.-K.), the Crohn’s and Colitis Foundation of America (N.K.) and the Michigan Gastrointestinal Peptide Research Center NIDDK 5P30DK034933 (H.G., N. K.). *Correspondence: Helmut Grasberger, M.D. and John Y. Kao, M.D. Division of Gastroenterology Department of Internal Medicine University of Michigan Health System 6520 MSRB I, SPC 5682 1150 West Medical Center Drive Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109 Telephone: (734) 647-2964 Fax: (734) 763-2535 E-mail: helmut@med.umich.edu; jykao@med.umich.edu Disclosures: The authors have nothing to disclose. Accession number: NCBI GEO series GSE60933. Abbreviations: CD, Crohn's disease; cCD, colon-only Crohn's disease; GALT, gut-associated lymphatic tissue; GF, germ-free; GSEA, gene set enrichment analysis; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; ILC, innate lymphoid cells; MLN, mesenteric lymph node; SFB, segmented filamentous bacterium; SPF, specific pathogen-free. Author contributions HG: designed study, acquired and analyzed data, prepared manuscript; JG, HNK, SK, MZ, KE, ABS: developed experimental tools; NK: supplied critical materials and reviewed manuscript; MEZ: performed microscopy; JLM and CO: contributed funding and reviewed manuscript. JYK: designed study, revised and edited manuscript, obtained funding. M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 2 BACKGROUND & AIMS: Dual oxidase 2 (DUOX2), a hydrogen-peroxide generator at the apical membrane of gastrointestinal epithelia, is upregulated in patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) before the onset of inflammation, but little is known about its effects. We investigated the role of DUOX2 in maintaining mucosal immune homeostasis in mice. METHODS: We analyzed the regulation of DUOX2 in intestinal tissues of germ-free vs conventional mice, mice given antibiotics or colonized with only segmented filamentous bacteria, mice associated with human microbiota, and mice with deficiencies in interleukin (IL)23 and 22 signaling. We performed 16S rRNA gene quantitative PCR of intestinal mucosa and mesenteric lymph nodes of Duoxa-/mice that lack functional DUOX enzymes. Genes differentially expressed in Duoxa-/mice compared to co-housed wild type littermates were correlated with gene expression changes in early-stage IBD using gene set enrichment analysis. RESULTS: Colonization of mice with segmented filamentous bacteria upregulated intestinal expression of DUOX2. DUOX2 regulated redox-signaling within mucosa-associated microbes and restricted bacterial access to lymphatic tissues of the mice, thereby reducing microbiotainduced immune responses. Induction of Duox2 transcription by microbial colonization did not require the mucosal cytokines IL17 or IL22, although IL22 increased expression of Duox2. Dysbiotic, but not healthy human microbiota, activated a DUOX2 response in recipient germfree mice that corresponded to abnormal colonization of the mucosa with distinct populations of microbes. In Duoxa-/mice, abnormalities in ileal mucosal gene expression at homeostasis recapitulated those in patients with mucosal dysbiosis. CONCLUSIONS: DUOX2 regulates interactions between the intestinal microbiota and the mucosa to maintain immune homeostasis in mice. Mucosal dysbiosis leads to increased expression of DUOX2, which might be a marker of perturbed mucosal homeostasis in patients with early-stage IBD. KEYWORDS: intestine, gastroenterology, microbial dysbiosis, inflammatory bowel disease M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 3 A single layer of epithelial cells constitutes a physical and immune barrier between the gutassociated lymphatic tissue (GALT) and >1013 commensal microbes in the intestinal lumen. The function of this barrier plays a central role in maintaining normal mucosal homeostasis and protecting against potentially life-threatening pathogens by creating spatial separation and adequate innate defense response against luminal microbes 1. Conceivably the most primordial form of innate defense response, present in all metazoans, is the release of reactive oxygen species (ROS) generated by membrane integral enzymes. In animals, prime candidates for such ROS-based defense system at barrier epithelia are the dual oxidases (DUOX), epithelial-specific NADPH oxidases that generate extracellular H2O2. Of the two DUOX isoenzymes, DUOX1 is highly expressed in bronchial epithelium and urothelium, whereas in the gut the expression is dominated by DUOX2 2,3. Expression of a DUOX2 homolog in the gut epithelium is evolutionary conserved. Indeed, studies in invertebrates indicate an important role of DUOX in innate host defense against luminal bacteria 4,5. We recently provided evidence in mice that DUOX2-generated H2O2 restricts Helicobacter felis colonization within the gastric mucus layer, providing a paradigm for the nonredundant function of DUOX in mammalian innate defense 6. A critical function of DUOX2 in the epithelial defense response against the abundant intestinal microbiota would be consistent with the robust upregulation of DUOX2 in conditions frequently associated with dysbiosis, even in the absence of manifest inflammation. For instance, DUOX2 is markedly upregulated in the intestine of patients with irritable bowel syndrome 7, in the normal appearing proximal small intestine after ileal pouch-anal anastomosis 8, and in noninflamed ilea of patients with colon-only Crohn's disease (cCD) 9. However, whether DUOX2 induction is a consequence of microbial dysbiosis and plays a role in maintaining immune homeostasis is currently unclear. In the present study we provide evidence that an epithelial-attaching commensal, segmented filamentous bacterium (SFB), is sufficient to induce DUOX2. DUOX activity modulates redox-signaling in mucosa-associated microbes and restricts the access of bacteria M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 4 to the GALT system, thereby dampening microbiota-induced mucosal immune responses. Dysbiotic microbiota from patients transplanted into germ-free recipient mice leads to differential mucosal colonization and Duox2 induction compared to microbiota from healthy donors. In addition, a loss of DUOX activity alone is sufficient to cause ileal gene expression abnormalities reminiscent of that associated with mucosal dysbiosis in cCD. These findings implicate DUOX2 as a critical modulator in mutualistic host-microbiota interactions that are fundamental in maintaining gut immune homeostasis. M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 5 Materials and Methods Animals Duoxa-/and gender-matched wild type (wt) littermates in 129S6 genetic background were cohoused (3-5 animals/cage) in microisolator cages under SPF conditions 6. Food and water were supplied ad libitum, with the latter including a supplemental dose of L-thyroxine to maintain euthyroidism of Duoxa-/mice 10. Il22-/-, Il23r-/-, and RORgt-/mice (all in B6 background) have been described previously 11-13. C57BL6 mice with distinct resident microbiota were purchased from Taconic Farms and Jackson Laboratory, respectively. For all studies, mice were used at 912 weeks of age. Studies were approved by the University of Michigan Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (PRO-00004497 and PRO-00002436). Detailed methods for tissue collection, mono-association of mice with SFB, human-flora associated mouse model, enteric Salmonella Typhimurium infection, dextran sodium sulfate challenge, intestinal permeability assay, microarray-based gene expression profiling, histology and morphometric analysis, 16S rRNA in situ hybridization and immunostaining, DNA and RNA extraction, realtime reverse transcription PCR (rt-qPCR), Western blotting and ileal enteroid culture are available in the Supplementary materials and methods. Statistics Log-transformed expression data from unpaired groups were analyzed using Welch's ttest with multiple comparisons adjustment or with one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni post-hoc tests. The Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-rank test was used to test for differences between genotype groups in mixed housing experiments. Each cage was analyzed as a pair of the means obtained in Duoxa-/and cohoused wt littermates (n=2-3 mice per genotype and cage). Data were analyzed using GraphPad Prism 6.0 (San Diego, CA). M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 6 Results Intestinal expression of DUOX2 in response to microbial colonization We initially analyzed longitudinal DUOX2 expression profiles in the gut of mice kept in our specific pathogen-free (SPF) or germfree (GF) environment. Both DUOX2 subunit genes (i.e., Duox2 and Duoxa2; Supplementary Figure S1A) were robustly induced by the microbiota as reported previously 14, but expression did not directly correlate with luminal bacterial density as Duox2 mRNA induction peaked in the terminal ileum (Figures 1A and B). Compared to GF mice, DUOX2 protein expression was also robustly induced in the ilea of SPF mice (Figure 1C; Supplementary Figure S2). Expression of other epithelial NADPH oxidases was exceedingly low (Duox1, Figure 1D) or predominant in the colorectum (Nox1, Figure 1E). Duox2 expression was maintained in response to continuous stimulation by the microbiota, since levels of Duox2 and Duoxa2 mRNA were significantly diminished following a single dose of antibiotics by oral gavage (Figure 1F). Induction of DUOX2 by colonization with a mucosa-adherent commensal Because the murine ileum is typically colonized by SFB that, unusual for commensal bacteria, grow firmly attached to the intestinal epithelium in a symbiotic relationship, we hypothesized that SFB contributed to the ileum-dominant expression of DUOX2. We compared mice maintained in either an SFBneg SPF environment (Jackson Laboratories; B6-Jax) with those housed in SFBpos SPF environment (Taconic Farms (B6-Tac)15 or our own SFBpos SPF animal facilities). Quantitative PCR of SFB-specific 16S rRNA confirmed that mucosaassociated SFB were essentially restricted to the ileum in SFBpos animals but absent in SFBneg B6-Jax mice (Figure 2A). SPF mice from these different environments had indistinguishable Duox2 expression profiles except that B6-Jax mice lacked the peak ileal expression (Figure 2A and B; Supplementary Figure S2). To corroborate that SFB was sufficient to trigger DUOX2 induction, GF mice were gavaged with cecal content from SFB-monocolonized (SFBmono) mice. M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 7 After one week, a high level of mucosa-associated SFB was detected in both the ileum and colon (Figure 2C). SFB colonization was accompanied by robust induction of Duox2 mRNA (Figure 2C) and protein (Figure 2D and E; Supplementary Figure S2) confirming that monoassociation with SFB was sufficient for Duox2 induction. Twenty-four hours following treatment with streptomycin, SFB-specific 16S rRNA in ileal mucosal samples (as surrogate for viable SFB) was reduced to less than 0.1% (Figure 2F), in agreement with the suppression of Duox2 and Duoxa2 mRNA (Figure 1F). Overall, these results indicate that epithelial-attaching SFB strongly triggers DUOX2 expression. Microbial induction of DUOX2 does not require a functional IL-22 pathway SFB is known to be a particular powerful inducer of mucosal innate lymphoid cells (ILC) to produce interleukin-22 (IL-22), which is a master regulator of epithelial defense responses 15. In fact, IL-22 was strongly stimulated in the ileum of SFBmono mice (Figure 3A; Supplementary Figure S3A) and its expression was acutely abrogated in mice treated with enteral streptomycin (Figure 3B), reminiscent of the sharp decline in mucosal SFB colonization and Duox2 expression (Figures 1F and 2F). The anti-microbial lectin Reg3g, a known IL-22 target gene, was also strongly upregulated in the ileum of SFBmono mice (Figures 3A). To directly test whether IL-22 can activate Duox2 expression, ileal enteroids were stimulated with recombinant IL-22. Both Duox2 and Duoxa2 were induced about 15-fold within 18 hours (Figure 3C) and DUOX protein became clearly detectable at the luminal surface of enteroids (Figure 3D). In contrast, the proinflammatory cytokine TNFα was unable to induce the Duox2 expression pathway in enteroids (Supplementary Figure S3B). To investigate whether IL22 is essential to maintain Duox2 expression in vivo, we examined whether disrupted IL-22signaling in mice abrogates Duox2 expression. As expected, IL22-/-, IL23R-/and RORgt-/ (deficient in both TH17 and ILC development) mice all lacked ileal IL22 expression compared to wt controls sharing the same environment (Figure 3E). Accordingly, the former were also M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 8 deficient in expression of the IL-22 target genes Reg3g and Saa1. In stark contrast, Duox2 and Duoxa2 were both upregulated in mice lacking IL-22-mediated defense (Figure 3F), indicating that IL-22 is not essential for high ileal DUOX2 expression. Interestingly, induction of Duox2 in these IL-22 deficient models was associated with higher level of mucosa-adherent SFB (Figure 3F), further corroborating the concept that increased commensal-epithelial interaction can trigger Duox2 expression independently of IL-22. Exposure of ileal enteroids to sterile microbial extracts prepared from either SFBneg or SFBpos mice induced epithelial toll-like receptor downstream targets, but completely failed to induce Duox2 (Supplementary Figure S4), suggesting that active bacteria, rather than soluble bacterial products, are critical for the Duox2 response. DUOX supports luminal containment of bacteria To investigate further the role of the DUOX response, we utilized mice lacking functional DUOX enzymes (Duoxa-/-) 6 (Figure 4A; Supplementary Figure S1B). A ROS-inducible SFB catalase gene (SFB-kat) (Supplementary Figure S5) was measured as a marker of H2O2 exposure. We found that kat expression of mucosal, but not luminal, SFB was markedly higher in wt compared to Duoxa-/mice (Figure 4B), confirming DUOX deficiency status of Duoxa-/ mice and the ability of DUOX to modulate redox-sensitive pathways in mucosa-adherent SFB. The expression of several other tested SFB genes was not under control of DUOX activity indicating specificity of the SFB-kat response (Supplementary Figure S6A). In contrast to SFBkat, expression of epithelial anti-oxidative enzymes was not significantly affected by DUOX status (Supplementary Figure S6B). Thus, DUOX activity does not lead to global changes in epithelial redox status, at least under homeostatic conditions. Duoxa-/mice did not manifest signs of spontaneous intestinal inflammation (such as, body weight loss or cellular infiltration) (Supplementary Figure S7) and SFB colonization levels did not differ between Duoxa-/mice and M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 9 cohoused wt littermates nor did the level of mucosa-associated ileal microbiota surveyed using 16S qPCR assays specific for the major bacterial phyla (Supplementary Figure S8). Although considered a strict anaerobe unable to survive within host tissues, SFB or remnants thereof are translocated across the epithelial barrier 16, potentially involving epithelial endocytosis 17,18. We therefore investigated whether induction of DUOX2 by commensal bacteria regulates their transepithelial passage, an integral part of small intestinal immune surveillance. As proxy for transepithelial flux of bacterial DNA, we compared the relative concentration of bacterial DNA in mesenteric lymph nodes (MLN) and corresponding mucosal samples. MLN-to-mucosa ratios for γ−Proteobacteria and SFB were significantly elevated in Duoxa-/mice compared to littermate controls sharing the same environment (Figure 4C; Supplementary Figure S9). Paracellular permeability to dextran (4 kDa) was not altered in Duoxa-/mice (Figure 4D) excluding an unspecific defect in the intestinal epithelial barrier. The ability of DUOX2 to restrict translocation of indigenous bacteria appeared to be congruent with in vitro studies, where DUOX2 conferred cell-autonomous protection against pathogens, such as, Salmonella Typhimurium 19, Listeria monocytogenes 20, and Campylobacter jejuni 21. To assess whether DUOX interfered with pathogen translocation, mice were orally challenged with Salmonella Typhimurium, which preferentially targets the small intestinal epithelium 22. Following pretreatment with streptomycin, acute infection induced ileal Duoxa2 expression to a level observed in mice with an SFB-containing microbiota (Supplementary Figure S11A). Salmonella colonization was not different in Duoxa-/mice and wt controls (Figure 4E). The epithelial chemokines Cxcl1 and Ccl20 are robustly induced by acute Salmonella infection in vitro and in vivo, a response attributed to stimulation of toll-like 5 receptors 23,24. Both chemokines showed exacerbated induction in the ileum of infected Duoxa-/ mice compared to infected controls, compatible with increased activation of basolateral receptors (Supplementary Figures S11B and C). That Duoxa-/mice were less able to contain luminal Salmonella was further indicated by increased early systemic dissemination of the M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 10 pathogen (Figure 4E; Supplementary Figure S12). Unspecific intestinal permeability in infected mice was indistinguishable between Duoxa-/and wt mice (Figure 4D). Overall, these studies indicate that DUOX reduces early systemic dissemination of a bona fide epithelial-invasive pathogen providing further evidence as to its role in maintaining the innate epithelial barrier in the small intestine. Loss of DUOX2 augments SFB-induced changes in ileal gene expression To further examine whether loss of DUOX activity perturbs immune homeostasis, we analyzed genome-wide expression profiles in the ileal mucosa of Duoxa-/and cohoused wt littermates (Figure 5A). We identified genes with consistent induction in Duoxa-/mice (Figure 5B). Functional pathway analysis revealed an enrichment of annotations related to innate defense and inflammatory responses (Supplementary Figure S13). Since DUOX2 was strongly induced by SFB (Figure 2C) and restricted their mucosal passage (Figure 4C), we hypothesized that loss of DUOX activity would exaggerate the effects of SFB on host gene expression. We used gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) to test whether SFB-regulated genes 15 show concordant expression differences between Duoxa-/and wt littermate controls. Genes strongly upregulated (or downregulated) by monocolonization of GF mice with SFB (or by cohousing of B6-Jax with B6-Tac animals, respectively) were significantly enriched (P<.001; 1000 permutations) among the genes upregulated (or downregulated) in Duoxa-/(Figures 5D and 5E). There was also a trend towards higher expression of IL-17/22 cytokines in Duoxa-/mice (Supplementary Figure S14). Results of these studies imply that SFB not only induces DUOX2 expression, but that normal DUOX activity may dampen other SFB-induced innate mucosal responses under homeostatic conditions. Dysbiotic microbiota from IBD patients confers Duox2 induction in human-microbiota associated mice M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 11 Our findings above indicate that murine DUOX2 functions as an epithelial first-line defense system affecting normal mucosal immune homeostasis. In humans, DUOX2 and DUOXA2 have been identified among the top upregulated genes in the ilea of IBD patients 9 including those without ileal inflammation, suggesting a role in abnormal immune homeostasis preceding the manifestation of histological lesions. In these patients, dysbiotic changes of the mucosal microbiota have been described, although a causative relationship to DUOX2 upregulation has not been established. To explore whether abnormal microbiota is sufficient to explain overexpression of DUOX2 in the pre-clinical stage of IBD, we analyzed Duox2 expression in GF mice following association with human microbiota from IBD patients or healthy donors. As observed previously 25, association of mice with normal human microbiota has little or no effect on the expression of host defense genes highly responsive to mouse microbiota (Figure 6A). However, significantly higher induction of the DUOX2 system was observed among mice inoculated with dysbiotic fecal samples from patients with active colitis. Although intestinal samples from mice colonized with healthy or dysbiotic human microbiota did not differ in the overall mucosa-adherent eubacterial load, there was higher mucosal association with members of the family of Enterobacteriaceae (Figure 6B). While the specific microbial species responsible for DUOX2 induction are unknown and likely donor specific, it is tempting to speculate that, in the context of dysbiotic microbiota, indigenous pathobionts gain increased access to the intestinal epithelium triggering a DUOX2 defense response. The gene expression changes in DUOX defective mice resemble mucosal dysbiosis associated changes in non-inflamed ilea of IBD patients Since a DUOX defect exaggerated the ileal immune response to epithelial-attaching SFB, we hypothesized that a defect in DUOX would trigger similar pathogenetic changes as those observed in non-inflamed ilea affected by mucosal dysbiosis. Cross-species GSEA revealed that genes with strongest upregulation in non-inflamed ilea of patients with cCD 9 were M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 12 significantly enriched among genes upregulated in Duoxa-/animals, whereas genes with suppressed expression in cCD patients showed concordant downregulation in Duoxa-/(Figure 6C). Hence, a loss of DUOX activity in mice leads to subtle gene expression changes that recapitulated the abnormalities found in non-inflamed ilea of patients with mucosal dysbiosis. M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 13 Discussion Our current study establishes mammalian DUOX2 as a critical modulator of mutualistic hostmicrobiota interactions that are fundamental in maintaining gut immune homeostasis. While the induction of murine Duox2 by the normal microbiota has been reported recently 14, our results provide a link between an epithelial-attaching commensal and DUOX2 activation. Induction does not depend on mucosal IL-23/22 cytokine circuitry, although the latter can boost expression of DUOX2. DUOX activity modulates redox-signaling in mucosa-associated commensals and restricts the translocation of bacterial material into the GALT system, thereby dampening microbiota-induced mucosal immune responses. Ultimately, our study provides a functional link between DUOX2 induction in early stages of IBD and the associated changes in mucosal microbiota. Not only is DUOX2 induced by constituents found in the dysbiotic flora of IBD patients, but lack of the DUOX defense system is sufficient to cause ileal gene expression changes reminiscent of those in an early pathogenetic stage of IBD associated with mucosal dysbiosis. There are several lines of evidence that support the concept that direct commensal epithelial contact is a primary trigger for DUOX2 expression. We showed that monocolonization with SFB was sufficient for high-level DUOX2 induction corresponding to the mucosal abundance of SFB along the intestinal tract. This finding was in contrast to a recent report showing that other indigenous bacteria that, unlike SFB, are normally kept at distance from the epithelium, did not stimulate Duox2 expression 14. Consistent with the concept that DUOX2 induction is triggered by access of bacteria to the epithelium, we found that microbial extracts prepared from either SFBneg or SFBpos microbiota were not sufficient to induce Duox2 in ileal enteroids (Supplementary Figure S4). Arguing against a role of soluble factors is also the fact that microbiota-induced Duox2 expression at homeostasis does not depend on toll-like receptor signaling since it was not abolished in Myd88-/-Trif-/mice 14. The regulation of DUOX2 by epithelial contact with constituents of the microbiota is consistent with a role of mammalian M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 14 DUOX2 as sentinel response against potential threats to the epithelial barrier. In SFBneg SPF mice, induction of DUOX2 was still higher in the small intestine compared to the colon, despite the latter having higher bacterial load (bacteria per ml luminal content: ileum ~108; colon ~1011). This observation is likely related to the distinct physical properties of the colonic mucus layer, which is less penetrable for bacteria-sized particles 26. To directly examine SFB-induced cellautonomous signaling and its effects on Duox2 expression will require the coculture of SFB with highly differentiated intestinal epithelial cells in vitro. Given the recent progress in the in vitro culture of SFB 27 and enteroid-derived monolayers 28, such studies should become feasible in the future. Epithelial innate defense responses are coordinated by IL-22, which stimulates expression of secreted antimicrobial effectors 29 (Figure 7). IL-22 is produced in TH17 cells and ILC found in the intestinal lamina propria, Peyer’s patches and MLN 30, whereas IL-22 receptor is almost exclusively detected in epithelial cells. A master regulator for activation of the IL-22 pathway is IL-23 produced by lamina propria macrophages upon contact with bacteria or sensing of bacterial products 31. We showed that IL-22 robustly induced Duox2 in enteroids indicating that activation of the IL-23/22 pathway can amplify DUOX2-mediated defense. However, in contrast to expression of Reg3g or Saa1, expression of Duox2 was upregulated rather than diminished in IL-22 deficient animals. In this scenario, a lack of antimicrobial effectors allowed increased mucosal access of indigenous bacteria (e.g., SFB) inducing Duox2 expression (Figure 7C). In terms of Duox2 expression, increased bacterial-epithelial contact in IL-22 deficient mice apparently overrides the lack of IL-22 mediated stimulation. We thus hypothesize that the first line defense provided by DUOX2 restricts activation of the IL-22 pathway under homeostatic conditions, the latter being strongly activated following bacterial sensing by lamina propria macrophages (Figure 7A). In fact, even in an SPF environment (SFBpos), Duoxa-/displayed a trend towards higher ileal expression of IL-17/22 cytokines (Figure 7B; Supplementary Figure S14). M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 15 We found that loss of DUOX activity increased mucosal penetration of a microbiota subset at homeostasis despite normal paracellular permeability. One potential mechanism is the suppression of bacterial virulence within an oxidative microenvironment. For instance, in vitro exposure of Campylobacter jejuni to DUOX2-generated H2O2 suppresses polysaccharide capsule synthesis and thereby invasion of epithelial cells 21. We showed here that DUOX was sufficient to regulate expression of a redox-sensitive response element (putative perR-kat operon) in mucosa-associated SFB. Such DUOX-dependent change in the redox-status of juxtaepithelial bacteria was also evident in our prior study of gastric Helicobacter felis infection 6. Hence, DUOX-generated H2O2 can modulate protein function within mucosa-associated bacteria, potentially suppressing virulence behavior of indigenous pathobionts. In addition, DUOX may also support epithelial-cell intrinsic defense mechanisms that contain endocytosed bacteria, a concept compatible with the protective effect of DUOX2 in epithelial invasion studies 19,20. Endocytosed bacteria are targeted for lysosomal degradation via selective macroautophagy (xenophagy). Such epithelial xenophagy delays early Salmonella dissemination to extraintestinal sites 32,33 and may be facilitated by oxidative inactivation of the delipidation enzyme ATG4B 34. It is thus an attractive hypothesis that in intestinal epithelium, DUOX-generated H2O2 supports the targeting of autophagy activity to endocytosed bacteria. This concept would also be consistent with the previous finding that DUOX2 co-localizes at the bacterial entry site with the bacterial pattern recognition receptor NOD2 20, which can directly recruit the autophagocytic protein ATG16L1 35. Although low level of transepithelial uptake of bacteria is part of the normal immune surveillance, exaggerated translocation of bacteria into Peyer's patches is a feature found in CD patients, despite normal permeability to protein and absent inflammation 36,37. The genes most specifically associated with CD are crucial for epithelial containment of intracellular commensals 32 and invasive pathogens, such as, Salmonella in animal models 32,33,38. The mild phenotype observed in these models is not unlike the phenotype of Duoxa-/mice (Figure 7B). The robust M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 16 upregulation of DUOX2 in non-inflamed ilea of colon-only CD patients 9 could therefore provide a compensatory response limiting bacterial translocation. In fact, we showed that a defect in the DUOX response alone is sufficient to cause ileal gene expression profiles reminiscent of those found in noninflamed ilea of cCD patients, suggesting that a functional defect in the DUOX2 system could be a novel susceptibility event in CD. Here we also showed that dysbiotic microbiota from IBD patients, but not microbiota from healthy donors, was able to trigger the DUOX2 system when transferred into GF mice. Mice reconstituted with a dysbiotic microbiota showed a higher abundance of mucosa-associated Enterobacteriaceae. In this context, it is interesting that adherent, invasive E. coli have been frequently isolated from mucosal samples of CD patients 39. Since unbalanced production of ROS can exacerbate inflammation 40, DUOX2 upregulation in IBD is often deemed to be deleterious. Here we demonstrate that loss of DUOX activity not only increases mucosal bacterial uptake, but caused an ileal gene expression profile reminiscent of early CD-associated changes, indicating a distinct paradigm for the role of DUOX2 in early CD pathogenesis. Accordingly, the upregulation of DUOX2 in patients with quiescent ileal disease can be interpreted as a sentinel response against increased commensalepithelial interaction reflecting a defective host defense mechanism that normally keeps commensals at bay. Thus, increased ileal DUOX2 level may prove to be an important marker of perturbed mucosal homeostasis early in the pathogenesis of IBD. M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 17 Acknowledgments: We thank X. De Deken and F. Miot for providing DUOX antibodies. This study was supported by the National Institutes of Health grants RO1DK087708-01 (J.Y.K.) and RO1DK055732-15 (J.L.M.), a JSPS Postdoctoral Fellow for Research Abroad (S. K. and H. N.-K.), the Crohn’s and Colitis Foundation of America (N.K.) and the Michigan Gastrointestinal Peptide Research Center NIDDK 5P30DK034933 (H.G., N. K.). M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 18 REFERENCES 1. Goto Y, Ivanov, II. Intestinal epithelial cells as mediators of the commensal-host immune crosstalk. Immunol Cell Biol 2013;91:204-14. 2. Geiszt M, Witta J, Baffi J, et al. Dual oxidases represent novel hydrogen peroxide sources supporting mucosal surface host defense. FASEB J 2003;17:1502-4. 3. El Hassani RA, Benfares N, Caillou B, et al. Dual oxidase2 is expressed all along the digestive tract. American journal of physiology. Gastrointestinal and liver physiology 2005;288:G933-42. 4. Ha EM, Oh CT, Bae YS, et al. A direct role for dual oxidase in Drosophila gut immunity. Science 2005;310:847-50. 5. Chavez V, Mohri-Shiomi A, Garsin DA. Ce-Duox1/BLI-3 generates reactive oxygen species as a protective innate immune mechanism in Caenorhabditis elegans. Infection and immunity 2009;77:4983-9. 6. Grasberger H, El-Zaatari M, Dang DT, et al. Dual oxidases control release of hydrogen peroxide by the gastric epithelium to prevent Helicobacter felis infection and inflammation in mice. Gastroenterology 2013;145:1045-54. 7. Aerssens J, Camilleri M, Talloen W, et al. Alterations in mucosal immunity identified in the colon of patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Clinical gastroenterology and hepatology : the official clinical practice journal of the American Gastroenterological Association 2008;6:194-205. 8. Yanai H, Ben-Shachar S, Baram L, et al. Gene expression alterations in ulcerative colitis patients after restorative proctocolectomy extend to the small bowel proximal to the pouch. Gut 2014;64:756-64. 9. Haberman Y, Tickle TL, Dexheimer PJ, et al. Pediatric Crohn disease patients exhibit specific ileal transcriptome and microbiome signature. J Clin Invest 2014;124:3617-33. 10. Grasberger H, De Deken X, Mayo OB, et al. Mice deficient in dual oxidase maturation M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 19 factors are severely hypothyroid. Mol Endocrinol 2012;26:481-92. 11. Zheng Y, Valdez PA, Danilenko DM, et al. Interleukin-22 mediates early host defense against attaching and effacing bacterial pathogens. Nat Med 2008;14:282-9. 12. Cox JH, Kljavin NM, Ota N, et al. Opposing consequences of IL-23 signaling mediated by innate and adaptive cells in chemically induced colitis in mice. Mucosal Immunol 2012;5:99-109. 13. Eberl G, Marmon S, Sunshine MJ, et al. An essential function for the nuclear receptor RORgamma(t) in the generation of fetal lymphoid tissue inducer cells. Nat Immunol 2004;5:64-73. 14. Sommer F, Backhed F. The gut microbiota engages different signaling pathways to induce Duox2 expression in the ileum and colon epithelium. Mucosal Immunol 2014. 15. Ivanov, II, Atarashi K, Manel N, et al. Induction of intestinal Th17 cells by segmented filamentous bacteria. Cell 2009;139:485-98. 16. Obata T, Goto Y, Kunisawa J, et al. Indigenous opportunistic bacteria inhabit mammalian gut-associated lymphoid tissues and share a mucosal antibody-mediated symbiosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010;107:7419-24. 17. Yamauchi KE, Snel J. Transmission electron microscopic demonstration of phagocytosis and intracellular processing of segmented filamentous bacteria by intestinal epithelial cells of the chick ileum. Infect Immun 2000;68:6496-504. 18. Caselli M, Holton J, Boldrini P, et al. Morphology of segmented filamentous bacteria and their patterns of contact with the follicle-associated epithelium of the mouse terminal ileum: implications for the relationship with the immune system. Gut Microbes 2010;1:367-72. 19. Botteaux A, Hoste C, Dumont JE, et al. Potential role of Noxes in the protection of mucosae: H2O2 as a bacterial repellent. Microbes Infect 2009;11:537-44. 20. Lipinski S, Till A, Sina C, et al. DUOX2-derived reactive oxygen species are effectors of M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 20 NOD2-mediated antibacterial responses. J Cell Sci 2009;122:3522-30. 21. Corcionivoschi N, Alvarez LA, Sharp TH, et al. Mucosal reactive oxygen species decrease virulence by disrupting Campylobacter jejuni phosphotyrosine signaling. Cell host & microbe 2012;12:47-59. 22. Haraga A, Ohlson MB, Miller SI. Salmonellae interplay with host cells. Nat Rev Microbiol 2008;6:53-66. 23. Sierro F, Dubois B, Coste A, et al. Flagellin stimulation of intestinal epithelial cells triggers CCL20-mediated migration of dendritic cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2001;98:13722-7. 24. Vijay-Kumar M, Carvalho FA, Aitken JD, et al. TLR5 or NLRC4 is necessary and sufficient for promotion of humoral immunity by flagellin. Eur J Immunol 2010;40:352834. 25. Gaboriau-Routhiau V, Rakotobe S, Lecuyer E, et al. The key role of segmented filamentous bacteria in the coordinated maturation of gut helper T cell responses. Immunity 2009;31:677-89. 26. Johansson ME, Phillipson M, Petersson J, et al. The inner of the two Muc2 mucindependent mucus layers in colon is devoid of bacteria. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008;105:15064-9. 27. Schnupf P, Gaboriau-Routhiau V, Gros M, et al. Growth and host interaction of mouse segmented filamentous bacteria in vitro. Nature 2015. 28. Moon C, VanDussen KL, Miyoshi H, et al. Development of a primary mouse intestinal epithelial cell monolayer culture system to evaluate factors that modulate IgA transcytosis. Mucosal Immunol 2014;7:818-28. 29. Liang SC, Tan XY, Luxenberg DP, et al. Interleukin (IL)-22 and IL-17 are coexpressed by Th17 cells and cooperatively enhance expression of antimicrobial peptides. J Exp Med 2006;203:2271-9. M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 21 30. Ivanov, II, McKenzie BS, Zhou L, et al. The orphan nuclear receptor RORgammat directs the differentiation program of proinflammatory IL-17+ T helper cells. Cell 2006;126:1121-33. 31. Kinnebrew MA, Buffie CG, Diehl GE, et al. Interleukin 23 production by intestinal CD103(+)CD11b(+) dendritic cells in response to bacterial flagellin enhances mucosal innate immune defense. Immunity 2012;36:276-87. 32. Benjamin JL, Sumpter R, Jr., Levine B, et al. Intestinal epithelial autophagy is essential for host defense against invasive bacteria. Cell Host Microbe 2013;13:723-34. 33. Conway KL, Kuballa P, Song JH, et al. Atg16l1 is required for autophagy in intestinal epithelial cells and protection of mice from Salmonella infection. Gastroenterology 2013;145:1347-57. 34. Scherz-Shouval R, Shvets E, Fass E, et al. Reactive oxygen species are essential for autophagy and specifically regulate the activity of Atg4. EMBO J 2007;26:1749-60. 35. Travassos LH, Carneiro LA, Ramjeet M, et al. Nod1 and Nod2 direct autophagy by recruiting ATG16L1 to the plasma membrane at the site of bacterial entry. Nat Immunol 2010;11:55-62. 36. Keita AV, Salim SY, Jiang T, et al. Increased uptake of non-pathogenic E. coli via the follicle-associated epithelium in longstanding ileal Crohn's disease. J Pathol 2008;215:135-44. 37. Salim SY, Silva MA, Keita AV, et al. CD83+CCR7dendritic cells accumulate in the subepithelial dome and internalize translocated Escherichia coli HB101 in the Peyer's patches of ileal Crohn's disease. Am J Pathol 2009;174:82-90. 38. Lapaquette P, Glasser AL, Huett A, et al. Crohn's disease-associated adherent-invasive E. coli are selectively favoured by impaired autophagy to replicate intracellularly. Cell Microbiol 2010;12:99-113. 39. Darfeuille-Michaud A, Boudeau J, Bulois P, et al. High prevalence of adherent-invasive M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 22 Escherichia coli associated with ileal mucosa in Crohn's disease. Gastroenterology 2004;127:412-21. 40. Biasi F, Leonarduzzi G, Oteiza PI, et al. Inflammatory bowel disease: mechanisms, redox considerations, and therapeutic targets. Antioxid Redox Signal 2013;19:1711-47. Author names in bold designate shared co-first authors. M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 23 FIGURE LEGENDS Figure 1. Intestinal DUOX2 expression depends on microbial colonization. Relative Duox2 (A) and Duoxa2 (B) mRNA expression in GF (n=5) and SPF (n=7) mice. Data represent geometric means±95% CI. dd, duodenum; je, jejunum; il, ileum; co, colon; re, rectum. (C) Immunoblot of DUOX2 protein. ACTB, β-actin loading control. (D, E) Relative mRNA expression of Duox1 and Nox1. Data represent geometric means±95% CI. (F) Effect of acute enteral antibiotic treatment on ileal Duox2 and Duoxa2 expression. Mice were analyzed 24 hours following oral gavage with streptomycin (20 mg; Abx); SPF, sham treated control. Bars indicate geometric means. ****, P<.0001; ***, P<.001; **, P<.01; *, P<.05. Figure 2. Mucosa-adherent SFB are a dominant inducer of ileal DUOX2 expression. (A) Mucosa-adherent SFB (16S-rRNA) and Duox2 mRNA level in SFBneg (B6-Jax; n=5) and SFBpos (B6-Tac; n=5) mice. Data represent geometric means±95% CI. dd, duodenum; je, jejunum; il, ileum; co, colon; re, rectum. (B) DUOX2 protein expression in ilea of B6-Jax and B6-Tac mice. Each lane represents an individual mouse. ACTB, β-actin loading control. (C, D) Mucosaassociated SFB and expression of Duox2 mRNA and protein in mice mono-associated for one week with SFB (SFBmono; n=5) or sham-treated GF controls (n=5). Data represent geometric means±95% CI. (E) Detection of DUOX2 protein by indirect immunofluorescence (red) and SFB by in situ hybridization (green) in the terminal ileum of GF and SFBmono mice. Scale bars, 10 µm. (F) Ileal mucosa-adherent SFB (16S-rRNA) in mice treated with oral streptomycin (Abx) or sham treated controls (SPF). ***, P<.001; **, P<.01; *, P<.05. Figure 3. IL-22 can augment DUOX2 expression but is not essential for DUOX2 induction by microbial colonization. (A) Expression of IL22 and Reg3g along the intestinal tract of GF and M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 24 SFBmono mice (n=5 per group). Data represent geometric means±95% CI. Note lower colonic expression of IL22 and Reg3g despite high level of mucosal SFB and DUOX2 (Fig 2C). (B) Acute microbial regulation of ileal IL22 expression. SPF (SFBpos) mice were analyzed 24 hours following oral gavage with streptomycin (Abx) or sham treatment (SPF). (C) Ileal enteroids were cultured with or without IL-22 (50 ng/ml for 18 h) and gene expression of selected genes determined by RT-qPCR. (D) Immunofluorescence of DUOX2 protein in IL-22-stimulated ileal enteroids. Cdh1, E-cadherin. (E) Ileal expression of IL22 and IL-22 target genes in wt and IL-22 deficient mice (IL22-/-, IL23R-/-, RORgt-/-). (F) Expression of DUOX2 subunit genes and mucosal SFB-colonization. Bars in panels E and F indicate median values. ****, P<.0001; ***, P<.001; **, P<.01; *, P<.05. Figure 4. DUOX2 restricts transepithelial uptake of bacteria in the small intestine. (A) Detection of DUOX2 protein (red) at the epithelial brush border in the terminal ileum of wt but not Duoxa-/ littermates; the basolateral cell marker E-cadherin (CDH1) is shown in green; scale bars represent 50 µm (left panels) and 20 µm (right panels), respectively. (B) SFB-specific catalase (kat) expression in mucosa-adherent and luminal SFB. (C) Graph depicts the ratio of 16S rDNA in MLN vs ileal mucosa indicative of transepithelial bacterial flux. Dashed lines connect mean bacterial DNA level of Duoxa-/mice and cohoused littermate controls. Eu, eubacteria; Firm, Firmicutes; Bac, Bacteroidetes; Prot, Gammaproteobacteria; Actino, Actinobacteria. (D) In vivo intestinal permeability for 4 kDa dextran in Duoxa-/and wt mice at baseline, following acute enteral Salmonella infection (ST), and after treatment with dextran sulfate sodium (DSS) to induce unspecific epithelial injury. (E) Acute systemic dissemination of enteral Salmonella Typhimurium in Duoxa-/and wt animals 24 h post enteral infection. Figure 5. Loss of DUOX activity disturbs mucosal homeostasis in the terminal ileum. (A) Experimental setup for gene expression profiling. (B) Expression heat maps depicting selected M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 25 genes upregulated in the ileum of Duoxa-/animals. (C) Ileal gene expression analyzed by RTqPCR. Mean expression in Duoxa-/animals is plotted relative to the mean in cohoused wt littermates (set to 1) in cage-wise comparisons (n=7). **, P<.01. (D, E) Genes controlled by SFB-monocolonization or by cohousing of B6-Jax (SFBneg) with B6-Tac (SFBpos) mice 15 were tested for correlation with genes affected by loss of DUOX activity using GSEA (see Supplementary Methods). Within each plot, genes are sorted for their relative ileal expression in Duoxa-/mice (left side: up in Duoxa-/-; right side: down in Duoxa-/-). Genes upregulated (downregulated) by introduction of SFB are significantly correlated with those upregulated (downregulated) in mice with loss of DUOX activity. Core enriched genes are listed in Supplementary Tables S16-S19. FDR, false discovery rate q-value; NES, normalized enrichment score. Figure 6. DUOX2 is induced by constituents of the microbiota from IBD patients and acts as a compensatory mucosal defense pathway. (A) Gene expression in colonic mucosa of mice colonized for two weeks with fecal material from healthy donors or patients with ulcerative colitis-associated dysbiosis. Bars indicate median values. Kruskal-Wallis test; ***, P<.001; **, P<.01; *, P<.05. (B) 16S rRNA level in mucosal samples corresponding to (A). *, P<.05. (C) Genes dysregulated in the non-affected ileum of patients with colon-only CD (cCD vs healthy controls) 9 were tested for correlation with genes affected by loss of DUOX2 activity using GSEA. Genes upregulated (downregulated) in non-inflamed tissue from CD patients are significantly enriched among those upregulated (downregulated) in mice with loss of DUOX activity. Leading edge gene subsets are depicted in Tables S20 and S21. FDR, false discovery rate q-value; NES, normalized enrichment score. Figure 7. Model for the integration of the DUOX2 system into the intestinal epithelial defense response. (A) Epithelial contacting microbes (e.g., SFB) induce DUOX2 by an IL-22M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 26 independent pathway at homeostasis. DUOX2 activity triggers an anti-oxidative response (kat) in mucosa-adherent SFB but does not prevent their colonization. (B) Lack of DUOX2 activity leads to increased uptake of bacterial material (e.g., SFB, Proteobacteria). Expression of compensatory host defense systems resulting in a proinflammatory milieu. (C) Lack of IL-22 dependent mucosal defense leads to mucosal dysbiosis and compensatory induction of DUOX2. (D) In IBD-associated mucosal dysbiosis, increased epithelial contact with and uptake of indigenous pathobionts triggers a compensatory DUOX2 response before the onset of clinical inflammation. Sensing of bacterial factors by antigen-presenting cells (APC) activates the IL23/IL-22 cascade for secretion of antimicrobial effectors and further enhancement of DUOX2 expression. M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 1 Supplementary Materials and Methods Animals Duoxa-/and gender-matched wt littermates were cohoused (3-5 animals/cage) in microisolator cages under SPF conditions 1. Food and water were supplied ad libitum, with the latter including a supplemental dose of L-thyroxine to maintain euthyroidism of Duoxa-/mice 2. For experiments involving Duoxa-deficient mice, animals used were in a pure 129S6 genetic background, except for studies shown in Fig. S9 and S12 that employed mice backcrossed for ten generations into C57BL6 background. All of the latter were confirmed to be homozygous carriers of the G169D Slc11a1 variant (rs47476426) genotyped using a HypCH4III endonuclease (New England Biolabs) restriction fragment length polymorphism. Il22-/-, Il23r-/-, and RORgt-/mice (all in B6 background) have been described previously 3-5. C57BL6 mice with distinct resident microbiota were purchased from Taconic Farms and Jackson Laboratory, respectively. For all studies, mice were used at 9-12 weeks of age. Studies were approved by the University of Michigan Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (PRO-00004497 and PRO-00002436). Mono-association of mice with SFB GF mice were aseptically transferred to microisolator cages and housed in sterile laminar-flow hoods. Mice were orally gavaged with a freshly prepared suspension of frozen cecal material from SFBmono mice 6 or GF controls. Tissues were collected one week following treatment. All mice remained bacteriologically sterile except for the presence of SFB (unculturable, positive gram-staining) in monocolonized mice. Tissue collection Animals were euthanized by isoflurane overdose. MLN, liver and spleen were harvested aseptically. Intestinal segments were collected from the duodenum (immediately following the M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 2 pylorus), jejunum (halfway between stomach and cecum), ileum (terminal portion), colon (midportion) and rectum. The isolated segments were opened longitudinally and rinsed thrice with PBS. Samples for nucleic acid extraction were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Samples for paraffin-embedding were fixed in 10% formalin. For cryosectioning, samples were snap-frozen in Tissue-Tek O.C.T. compound (Andwin Scientific, Woodland Hills, CA). Histology and morphometric analysis Serial 4 µm sections of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded samples were stained with H&E. For morphometry, the terminal ileum was scored for height of villi and depth of crypts on transverse sections at 200× magnification (Figure S7). For each animal, mean values were determined from at least 10 well oriented villus-crypt units. To assess mucosal macrophage accumulation, sections were histochemically stained for F4/80 (clone A3-1; 1:200; Abcam ab6640) and counterstained with hematoxylin. Average F4/80-positive cell number per villus-crypt unit was determined by analyzing at least 20 villus-crypt units per animal. Real-time reverse transcription PCR (RT-qPCR) Total RNA was prepared using TRIzol reagent, treated with deoxyribonuclease and cleaned up on RNeasy spin columns (Qiagen). RNA was reverse transcribed with Superscript II (Life Technologies) using random hexamer priming. Concentration and purity of RNA preparations were determined on a NanoDrop ND-1000 UV spectrophotometer. PCR amplifications were performed using a C1000 Thermal Cycler (Bio-Rad) with SYBR Green dye (Molecular Probes, Carlsbad, CA) and Platinum Taq DNA polymerase (Invitrogen). Each reaction was performed in triplicates with the following conditions: 1 min at 95°C, 40 cycles of 10 s at 95°C and 1 min at 65°C. Amplification specificity was confirmed by melting curve analysis of products. Gene expression of host genes was normalized to Hprt1 mRNA. Expression stability of Hprt1 was confirmed for all samples by comparison with a second house keeping gene, Polr2a. The M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 3 expression of SFB genes was normalized to SFB-specific 16S rRNA. Primer sequences are listed in Supplementary Table S15. Microarray-based gene expression profiling Total RNA was prepared using TRIzol reagent, treated with deoxyribonuclease and cleaned up on RNeasy spin columns (Qiagen). RNA integrity numbers (RIN) were determined using a Bioanalyzer instrument (Agilent Technologies) and ranged from 9.2 to 9.6 (mean: 9.5) with 28S/18S ratios between 1.8 and 1.9. Target labeled cRNA were hybridized to GeneChip Mouse Genome 430 2.0 arrays (Affymetrix). Data were normalized with the RMA procedure using the affy package of Bioconductor implemented in the R statistical language. The dataset is accessible from the NCBI's Gene Expression Omnibus through series GSE60933. For GSEA 7, genes regulated by SFB colonization were selected from GSE18348 8 based on 2.5-fold upregulation or 2-fold downregulation (unadjusted P<.05) in the comparisons of SFBmono mice with GF mice and cohoused B6-Jax (+B6-Tac) with B6-Jax mice, respectively. Genes significantly upor downregulated in the non-affected ilea of patients with cCD compared to ilea of healthy controls have been reported by Haberman et al. 9 (GSE57945). Genes were ranked by geometric means of expression ratios of cohoused Duoxa-/and wt controls. Significance of the enrichment score was calculated from 1000 random, size-matched gene set permutations. DNA isolation and 16S qPCR Genomic DNA was extracted from tissue samples as described 10. Phyla-specific PCR primers (Table S15) were used under validated conditions 11-14. Relative bacterial loads were compared using the 2−ΔΔCt method by normalizing 16S signal to the host DNA amplification signal. 16S rRNA in situ hybridization and immunostaining of tissue sections For staining of frozen sections, thawed 8 µm sections were briefly fixed in 4% freshly prepared M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 4 formaldehyde for 5 min, washed twice in PBS, and then blocked with 20% donkey serum in PBS. Primary antibodies used were a pan-DUOX antiserum (1:1,000) 15 or normal rabbit IgG (control; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA), an anti-Salmonella Typhimurium LPS monoclonal antibody (clone 1E6; 1:1,000) (GeneTex), and rat anti-E-cadherin (1:2,000) (Life Technologies). The staining was developed using Alexa Fluor-conjugated secondary antibodies (Life Technologies) and DNA counterstained with DAPI. Sequential in 16S rRNA situ hybridization and immunodetection followed protocols outlined previously in detail 16. Briefly, Carnoy's solution-fixed sections were hybridized in a humid chamber for 2 hours at 50°C with 5 ng/µl Alexa Fluor 488 labeled oligonucleotide SFB1008 (AF488-5'GCGAGCTTCCCTCATTACAAGG-3') 11 in a formamide-free hybridization buffer. Following washes in hybridization buffer and PBS, sections were blocked and stained for DUOX protein as described above. Enteric Salmonella Typhimurium infection model Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (strain SL1344) was grown at 37°C with shaking (150 rpm) in Luria-Bertani (LB) broth containing 100 µg/ml streptomycin. In the streptomycinpretreated model 17, mice in 129S6 background were given 20 mg streptomycin orally followed 24 hours later by oral gavage with 107 cfu S. Typhimurium (1 OD600 ~ 6x108 cfu/ml) in Hepes buffer (100 mM, pH 8.0) or with sterile buffer alone. In the thyphoid model, mice in C57BL6 background received 107 cfu S. Typhimurium by oral gavage without prior antibiotic pretreatment. Mice were euthanized 24 hours following infection. Livers were removed aseptically followed by collection of intestinal content from ileum, cecum, and colon. All samples were weighed and homogenized in 4°C cold PBS/0.1% Triton X-100. Cfu were determined by culturing serial dilutions on LB agar plates with 100 µg/ml streptomycin. In vivo intestinal permeability assay M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 5 Intestinal permeability was assessed by measuring the enteral uptake of fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated dextran (FD4, 4 kDa, Sigma) 18. Serum was obtained four hours after gavage with FD4 (0.6 mg per gram body weight). Serum FD4 levels were determined by fluorometry (ex/em, 490/530 nm) using standards serially diluted in mouse serum. Ileal enteroid culture The enteroid culture method was modified from the study by Sato et al. 19 The excised mouse ileum (∼6 cm) was opened longitudinally, rinsed with PBS, then incubated in ice-cold PBS containing 3 mM EDTA for 30 min at 4°C. After manual shaking for 30 sec, the tissue was moved to fresh cold PBS and shaken for 2 min. The tissue fragments were allowed to settle and the supernatant was collected and passed through a 70-µm cell strainer to remove tissue fragments. Crypts were separated from suspended single cells by centrifugation at 150 g (2 min). The crypt pellet was resuspended with Matrigel (BD Bioscience) for seeding into 24 well plates (50 µl drop per well). After polymerization of the Matrigel, 0.5 ml culture medium composed of advanced DMEM/F12 supplemented with Hepes (10mM), N2-supplement (1:100), B-27 supplement (1:50), L-glutamine (1:100), penicillin/streptomycin (1:100), 500 ng/ml Rspondin1, 100 ng/ml noggin, 50 ng/ml Wnt-3a and 100 ng/ml epidermal growth factor was added (all from Life Technologies). The media and growth factors (except for Wnt-3a) were changed every 4 days. For passage at 7–10 days post-plating, wells were rinsed twice with icecold PBS. Matrigel containing the enteroids was resuspended in PBS and passed once through a 30 gauge needle. Enteroid fragments were pelleted at 200 g (1 min), washed once with icecold DMEM/F12, centrifuged again, and resuspended in Matrigel for plating. Enteroids were stimulated by incubation in growth medium containing either recombinant murine IL-22 (50 ng/ml) or TNFα (60 ng/ml) (R&D Systems) for 18 hours. For immunostaining, washed enteroids were fixed in 1% freshly prepared formaldehyde (5 min), washed again, and M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 6 snap frozen in O.C.T. compound. For mRNA expression studies, culture medium was aspirated and the matrigel drop containing enteroids directly homogenized in TRIzol for subsequent RNA extraction. DSS-induced intestinal inflammation model To induce intestinal inflammation by dextran sulfate sodium salt (DSS), cohoused Duoxa-/and wt littermates received drinking water with 3% DSS (36–50 kDa; MP Biomedicals) (refreshed daily). To test whether DUOX status affects the extent of epithelial damage and/or epithelial wound healing in this model, mice were exposed to DSS for seven days, followed by one day on regular drinking water to initiate epithelial restitution. The mice were checked each day for morbidity and their weights were recorded. In vivo permeability assay was performed as described above (in vivo intestinal permeability assay). Weight loss and recovery were indistinguishable between Duoxa-/and wt mice exposed to repeat DSS cycles (Figure S10). Colonization of mice with healthy and dysbiotic human fecal microbiota Since mucosal dysbiosis in CD patients is not typically reflected by pronounced shifts in the microbial composition in the lumen 24, dysbiotic fecal samples were obtained from patients with active ulcerative colitis (dysbiosis at the family/phylum level confirmed by Illumina 16S rRNA sequencing; data not shown). Frozen stool samples from patients and healthy control donors were resuspended under anaerobic conditions and used to infect individual GF mice by gavage. Samples from the proximal colon were analyzed two weeks following microbial challenge. Western blotting Tissue samples were homogenized in Tissue Protein Extraction Reagent (T-PER, Thermo Scientific) containing a cocktail of protease inhibitors (Complete; Roche Applied Science) and incubated for 1 h at 4°C. The lysates was centrifuged 15 min at 10,000 rpm and concentration of M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 7 total soluble protein determined using the bicinchoninic acid method (BCA; Life Technologies). Equal amounts of solubilized proteins were diluted 3:1 in 4x reducing Laemmli buffer (BioRad) before loading and separation by SDS-PAGE electrophoresis. DUOX proteins were detected with pan-DUOX antibody (1:2,000) 15 and β-actin was detected as loading control (mAb C4; Santa Cruz Biotechnologies). For densitometry of bands, average density profile plots for individual lanes were generated and the peak areas above background level measured using the wand tool in ImageJ software 20. Statistics Log-transformed expression data from unpaired groups were analyzed using Welch's t-test (multiple comparisons adjustment: Bonferroni) or with one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni post-hoc tests. The Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-rank test was used to test for differences between genotype groups in mixed housing experiments. Each cage was analyzed as a pair of the means obtained in Duoxa-/and cohoused wt littermates (n=2-3 mice per genotype and cage). Data were analyzed using GraphPad Prism 6.0 (San Diego, CA). M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 8 Supplementary References 1. Grasberger H, El-Zaatari M, Dang DT, et al. Dual oxidases control release of hydrogen peroxide by the gastric epithelium to prevent Helicobacter felis infection and inflammation in mice. Gastroenterology 2013;145:1045-54. 2. Grasberger H, De Deken X, Mayo OB, et al. Mice deficient in dual oxidase maturation factors are severely hypothyroid. Mol Endocrinol 2012;26:481-92. 3. Zheng Y, Valdez PA, Danilenko DM, et al. Interleukin-22 mediates early host defense against attaching and effacing bacterial pathogens. Nat Med 2008;14:282-9. 4. Cox JH, Kljavin NM, Ota N, et al. Opposing consequences of IL-23 signaling mediated by innate and adaptive cells in chemically induced colitis in mice. Mucosal Immunol 2012;5:99-109. 5. Eberl G, Marmon S, Sunshine MJ, et al. An essential function for the nuclear receptor RORgamma(t) in the generation of fetal lymphoid tissue inducer cells. Nat Immunol 2004;5:64-73. 6. Umesaki Y, Okada Y, Matsumoto S, et al. Segmented filamentous bacteria are indigenous intestinal bacteria that activate intraepithelial lymphocytes and induce MHC class II molecules and fucosyl asialo GM1 glycolipids on the small intestinal epithelial cells in the ex-germ-free mouse. Microbiol Immunol 1995;39:555-62. 7. Subramanian A, Tamayo P, Mootha VK, et al. Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for interpreting genome-wide expression profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005;102:15545-50. 8. Ivanov, II, Atarashi K, Manel N, et al. Induction of intestinal Th17 cells by segmented filamentous bacteria. Cell 2009;139:485-98. 9. Haberman Y, Tickle TL, Dexheimer PJ, et al. Pediatric Crohn disease patients exhibit specific ileal transcriptome and microbiome signature. J Clin Invest 2014;124:3617-33. 10. Gillilland MG, 3rd, Erb-Downward JR, Bassis CM, et al. Ecological succession of M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 9 bacterial communities during conventionalization of germ-free mice. Appl Environ Microbiol 2012;78:2359-66. 11. Snel J, Heinen PP, Blok HJ, et al. Comparison of 16S rRNA sequences of segmented filamentous bacteria isolated from mice, rats, and chickens and proposal of \"Candidatus Arthromitus\". Int J Syst Bacteriol 1995;45:780-2. 12. Bacchetti De Gregoris T, Aldred N, Clare AS, et al. Improvement of phylumand classspecific primers for real-time PCR quantification of bacterial taxa. J Microbiol Methods 2011;86:351-6. 13. Matsuda K, Tsuji H, Asahara T, et al. Sensitive quantitative detection of commensal bacteria by rRNA-targeted reverse transcription-PCR. Appl Environ Microbiol 2007;73:32-9. 14. Huijsdens XW, Linskens RK, Mak M, et al. Quantification of bacteria adherent to gastrointestinal mucosa by real-time PCR. J Clin Microbiol 2002;40:4423-7. 15. De Deken X, Wang D, Many MC, et al. Cloning of two human thyroid cDNAs encoding new members of the NADPH oxidase family. The Journal of biological chemistry 2000;275:23227-33. 16. Johansson ME, Hansson GC. Preservation of mucus in histological sections, immunostaining of mucins in fixed tissue, and localization of bacteria with FISH. Methods Mol Biol 2012;842:229-35. 17. Grassl GA, Valdez Y, Bergstrom KS, et al. Chronic enteric salmonella infection in mice leads to severe and persistent intestinal fibrosis. Gastroenterology 2008;134:768-80. 18. Napolitano LM, Koruda MJ, Meyer AA, et al. The impact of femur fracture with associated soft tissue injury on immune function and intestinal permeability. Shock 1996;5:202-7. 19. Sato T, Vries RG, Snippert HJ, et al. Single Lgr5 stem cells build crypt-villus structures in vitro without a mesenchymal niche. Nature 2009;459:262-5. M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 10 20. Schneider CA, Rasband WS, Eliceiri KW. NIH Image to ImageJ: 25 years of image analysis. Nat Methods 2012;9:671-5. 21. Kuwahara T, Ogura Y, Oshima K, et al. The lifestyle of the segmented filamentous bacterium: a non-culturable gut-associated immunostimulating microbe inferred by whole-genome sequencing. DNA Res 2011;18:291-303. 22. Pamp SJ, Harrington ED, Quake SR, et al. Single-cell sequencing provides clues about the host interactions of segmented filamentous bacteria (SFB). Genome Res 2012;22:1107-19. 23. Reimand J, Arak T, Vilo J. g:Profiler--a web server for functional interpretation of gene lists (2011 update). Nucleic Acids Res 2011;39:W307-15. 24. Gevers D, Kugathasan S, Denson LA, et al. The treatment-naive microbiome in newonset Crohn's disease. Cell Host & Microbe 2014;15:382-392 Author names in bold designate shared co-first authors. M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 11 Supplementary Figure S1. Topology model of the DUOX/DUOXA complex and gene targeting strategy in Duoxa-deficient mice. (A) Topology model depicting the heterodimeric structure of a functional DUOX enzyme complex. (B) Arrangement of DUOX and DUOXA subunit genes on mouse chromosome 2 and targeting strategy to disrupt function of DUOX enzymes. Duoxa+, wt allele; Duoxa-, Duoxa-deficient allele. M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 12 Supplementary Figure S2. Correspondence of DUOX protein expression with relative Duox2 mRNA expression in mice associated with distinct microbiota. Relative DUOX protein expression was determined by densitometry of Western blots depicted in Figures 1 and 2 using ImageJ 20. a.u., arbitrary densitometric units. M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 13 Supplementary Figure S3. (A) Induction of cytokines in the ileum of mice monocolonized for one week with SFB. GF, germ-free controls. (B) Ileal enteroids were treated for 18 hours with cytokines at the indicated concentration. Recombinant IL-22 but not TNFα is sufficient to robustly induce Duox2 in vitro. ***, P<.001; **, P<.01; *, P<.05; ns, P>.05. Supplementary Figure S4. Sterile microbial extracts do not induce Duox2 expression in ileal enteroids. Sonicates of cecal contents of B6-Jax (SFBneg) and B6-Tac (SFBpos) mice were sterile-filtered (0.2 µm) and added to ileal enteroids cultured in complete growth medium (20 mg original wet weight/ml medium). Expression of Duox2, Ccl20, Cxcl1, and Saa1 were evaluated after exposure for 16 hours. *, P<.05; **, P<.01. M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 14 Supplementary Figure S5. Putative perR-kat operon in the SFB genome. Region of the SFB genome depicting the location of the kat (catalase) gene preceded by a putatively H2O2sensitive transcriptional repressor (putative perR; fur-homolog sequence). This arrangement suggests a perR-kat operon for H2O2-induced derepression of kat providing a rationale for the observed DUOX2-dependent induction of SFB-kat in vivo. Supplementary Figure S6. Effect of DUOX status on anti-oxidative gene expression in ileal mucosa and mucosa-associated SFB. (A) Relative gene expression in mucosa-adherent SFB. kat, catalase (SFBM_1159); myoAg, myosin-crossreactive antigen-like (SFBM_0327); fliC2, flagellin (SFBM_0642); adprt, adenin-phosphoribosyltransferase homolog (SFBSU_007G84); piplc, phosphoinositide phospholipase C homolog (SFBM_0755); fnbp, fibronectin-binding protein (SFBM_0986). Except for kat, genes were selected based on a putative role in SFBepithelial interaction 21,22. (B) Relative ileal expression of antioxidant enzymes in DUOX intact (wt) vs DUOX deficient (Duoxa-/-) mice. Values represent mean±SEM of n=3 independent expression ratios (intra-cage comparisons). *, P<.05; ns, P>.05. M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 15 Supplementary Figure S7. Absence of DUOX activity in SPF mice does not lead to spontaneous intestinal inflammation. (A) Body weight gain of Duoxa-/animals and wt littermates. Values indicate mean±SD of n=17-22 mice per group. m, males; f, females. (B) Exemplar hematoxylin and eosin stained sections of the small intestine of wt and Duoxa-/ littermates. Arrows in lower panels (20x objective magnification; ileum) indicate method of measurement of the height of villi (hv) and depth of crypts (dc). (C) Data show mean hv and dc values of wt (n=10) and Duoxa-/(n=9) littermates. All mice were males, between 11-13 weeks of age. (D) Exemplar histochemical staining for the macrophage marker F4/80. Shown are transverse sections of the ileal mucosa of a wt and Duoxa-/littermate pair. (E) Average number of F4/80-positive cells per villus-crypt unit. Values were determined by counting positive cells of at least 10 well-oriented villus-crypt units per animal. ns, P>.05. M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 16 Supplementary Figure S8. Effect of DUOX status on bacterial DNA level in ileal mucosa and MLN. Relative level of group-specific 16S rDNA in ileal (A) and MLN (B) samples from Duoxa-/ and cohoused littermate controls. Dashed lines connect mean bacterial DNA level of Duoxa-/ and wt mice in intra-cage comparisons. For comparison between cages/litters, relative amounts were normalized within each cage (level in wt animals set to 1). Eu, eubacteria; Firm, Firmicutes; Bac, Bacteroidetes; Prot, Proteobacteria; Actino, Actinobacteria. *, P<.05, two-sided Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed rank test. Supplementary Figure S9. Effect of DUOX status on bacterial DNA level in ileal mucosa and MLN in B6 mice. Relative level of 16S rDNA in ileal mucosal and MLN samples from Duoxa-/ and wt littermates in B6 genetic background. Mice from different litters were cohoused (mixed genotypes) after weaning. Bedding was mixed weekly between cages. Relative SFB 16S DNA level in MLN and ileal mucosa were determined in three months old mice by qPCR and normalized relative to the tissue genomic DNA level (mean level in wt mice set to 1). ns, P>.05; *, P<.05; **, P<.01; Mann-Whitney test. M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 17 Supplementary Figure S10. Body weight change and survival in the DSS-induced intestinal inflammation model. Three months old mice (male 129S6) were treated with 7-day cycles of 3% DSS in drinking water followed by 14 days recovery period on regular drinking water. DSStreated Duoxa-/and wt mice did not differ in body weight change (A) or survival rate (B). Body weight data represent mean±SEM. Supplementary Figure S11. Acute enteral Salmonella Typhimurium (ST) infection model. (A) Induction of Duoxa2 expression in the ileum 24 hours following enteral infection with ST. Abx, sham-infected animals pretreated with streptomycin. (C, D) Ileal expression of epithelial chemokines Cxcl1 and Ccl20 during acute ST infection. ***, P<.001; **, P<.01; *, P<.05. Data were log-transformed before analysis to approximate Gaussian distribution. Bars indicate the geometric means. M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 18 Supplementary Figure S12. Typhoid model of acute enteral Salmonella Typhimurium (ST) infection. B6 Duoxa-/and wt littermates (10 generation of backcrossing onto C57BL/6 background; all homozygous for the G169D Slc11a1 mutant) were orally infected with 1.5x107 cfu ST without antibiotic conditioning. (A) Systemic dissemination (liver, spleen) and ileal colonization 48 h following infection. Data represent geometric means±95% CI. (B) Detection of ST within ileal Peyer's 48 h following oral gavage with ST. Indirect Immunofluorescence detection of ST-specific lipopolysaccharide (mAb clone 1E6; 1:1,000; Genetex; green). Purple, DNA counterstained with DAPI. M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 19 Supplementary Figure S13. Functional enrichment analysis of genes affected by DUOX status. Genes upregulated in Duoxa-/mice (n=99 genes with mean >1.4 fold vs cohoused littermate controls) were tested for enrichment within the Biological Process terms subset of the Gene Ontology database using the g:GOSt program 23. Listed P values are adjusted for multiple comparisons using the Bonferroni method. Supplementary Figure S14. Ileal expression of IL-17/22 cytokines. Mean expression in Duoxa/animals is plotted relative to the mean in co-housed wt littermates (set to 1). **, P<.01; twosided Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed rank test. M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 20 Supplementary Table S15 qPCR primers mouse mRNA-specific primers name 5'-3' sequence gene DUOXA2-F GCCTGGCTTTGCTCACCA Duoxa2 DUOXA2-R GAGGAGGAGGCTCAGGAT DUOXA1-F CATCACCCTCACAGGCACC Duoxa1 DUOXA1-R GGAATGCCACCCACAGCA DUOX1-F CCCACGTTACCATTTCCATCA Duox1 DUOX1-R CATCTGCATAGCTGGCTGGA DUOX2-F GGACAGCATGCTTCCAACAAGT Duox2 DUOX2-R GCCTGATAAACACCGTCAGCA NOX1-F CAGAGCCACTGACATCCTGA Nox1 NOX1-R CAGACTCGAGTATCGCTGACA SAA1-F GCTACTCACCAGCCTGGTCT Saa1 SAA1-R GGCCTCTCTTCCATCACTGA CCL20-F GTACTGCTGGCTCACCTCT Ccl20 CCL20-R CATCTTCTTGACTCTTAGGCTGA CXCL1-F CTGCACCCAAACCGAAGTCAT Cxcl1 CXCL1-R TTGTCAGAAGCCAGCGTTCAC NOS2-F CTGAACTTGAGCGAGGAGCA Nos2 NOS2-R GTGCCAGAAGCTGGAACTCT IL17a-F GGACTCTCCACCGCAATGA Il17a IL17a-R GGCACTGAGCTTCCCAGATC IL17f-F CCCCATGGGATTACAACATCAC Il17f IL17f-R CATTGATGCAGCCTGAGTGTCT IL22-F CCCAGTCAGACAGGTTCCA Il22 IL22-R TGATCTCTCCACTCTCTCCA SFB-specific primers name 5'-3' sequence gene SFB736F 11 GACGCTGAGGCATGAGAGCAT 16S rDNA SFB844R 11 GACGGCACGGATTGTTATTCA (SFB) kat-F GTAGATGGTAACTCGGGAAGTACT SFBM_1159 kat-R CTCCCATGGAACGAGCAGTGT piplc-F CCTACTCTAGGAGAAGCAAGAGGA SFBM_0755 piplc-R GGTAAAACTCCACCATGACCATTCA myoag-F GTGGTGGCTGGGATATGTGGA SFBM_0327 M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 21 myoag-R CACCCGACTAATTGACCCTTAGGT fibrobp-F GCTGGTAGCCATGTTATCCTTGCA SFBM_0986 fibrobp-R CCATTCCTGGTTTTGCATGTGGCA flic2-F GGTGTAAGCATCGGGAATATGGGT SFBM_0642 flic2-R CAGCTGTGTTATCTGTTGATGCGA adprt-F GCGAGCTTCCCTCATTACAAGG SFBSU_007G84 adprt-R ACCATCCTGAATCTTCTCCAACA bacteria group-specific primers name 5'-3' sequence gene UniF334 12 ACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAGT 16S rDNA UniR514 12 ATTACCGCGGCTGCTGGC (universal) 928F-Firm 12 TGAAACTYAAAGGAATTGACG 16S rDNA Firm1040R 12 ACCATGCACCACCTGTC (Firmicutes) 798cfbF 12 CRAACAGGATTAGATACCCT 16s rDNA cfb967R 12 GGTAAGGTTCCTCGCGTAT (Bacteroidetes) 1080γF 12 TCGTCAGCTCGTGTYGTGA 16S rDNA γ1202R 12 CGTAAGGGCCATGATG (γ-Proteobact.) Act920F3 12 TACGGCCGCAAGGCTA 16S rDNA Act1200R 12 TCRTCCCCACCTTCCTCCG (Actinobacteria) En-lsu-3F 13 TGCCGTAACTTCGGGAGAAGGCA 23S rDNA En-lsu-3'R 13 TCAAGGACCAGTGTTCAGTGTC (Enterobacteriaceae) Ecoli-F 14 CATGCCGCGTGTATGAAGAA 16S rDNA Ecoli-R 14 CGGGTAACGTCAATGAGCAAA (E. coli) M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 22 Supplementary Table S16 Genes upregulated in SFBmono (GSE18348) 8 and Duoxa-/mice (leading edge gene subset corresponding to left panel of Fig. 5D) # of genes up in SFBmono vs GF (>2.5 fold; p<0.05): 56 leading-edge subset (core enrichment): 37 Gene name Rank in gene list Duoxa-/vs wt Running ES SFBmono vs GF 1600029D21RIK 0 3.63 0.09 13.15 SAA1 2 2.47 0.15 126.35 IFIT2 5 1.99 0.19 11.78 HEMT1 11 1.84 0.23 6.06 SAA2 13 1.77 0.27 12.96 HK2 21 1.65 0.31 3.82 USP18 29 1.54 0.33 3.30 PLA2G5 33 1.52 0.36 3.95 CXCL9 50 1.45 0.39 3.18 SLC28A2 57 1.41 0.41 3.82 SMPDL3B 69 1.39 0.43 5.11 ZBP1 83 1.36 0.45 6.73 SLC6A14 98 1.34 0.47 21.29 TIFA 104 1.33 0.49 3.69 NOS2 107 1.33 0.51 6.61 IGTP 125 1.31 0.52 5.92 CASP4 129 1.30 0.54 2.91 LY6D 154 1.29 0.56 4.59 CCL28 236 1.24 0.56 2.98 STOM 246 1.24 0.58 3.24 CEBPD 254 1.24 0.59 3.20 GBP6 268 1.23 0.61 2.64 DMBT1 290 1.23 0.62 3.13 BHMT 336 1.21 0.63 4.80 NFKBIZ 378 1.21 0.64 3.76 PTK6 381 1.21 0.65 3.38 MPA2L 421 1.20 0.66 3.17 IIGP2 440 1.20 0.67 4.10 TGM2 454 1.19 0.68 3.06 SOCS3 593 1.18 0.68 4.52 MAL 642 1.17 0.69 4.26 UPP1 720 1.16 0.69 4.14 PSMB8 844 1.15 0.69 3.75 GZMB 858 1.15 0.70 9.68 TCRB-J 1090 1.14 0.69 2.60 CD38 1113 1.14 0.70 6.08 SERPINA3G 1180 1.13 0.70 2.88 M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 23 Supplementary Table S17 Genes downregulated in SFBmono (GSE18348) 8 and Duoxa-/mice (leading edge gene subset corresponding to right panel of Fig. 5D) # of genes down in SFBmono vs GF (>0.6 fold; p<0.05): 65 leading-edge subset (core enrichment): 20 Gene name Rank in gene list Duoxa-/vs wt Running ES SFBmono vs GF SLC5A4A 13782 0.59 0.00 0.33 SLC5A4B 13779 0.65 -0.06 0.35 1300013J15RIK 13776 0.68 -0.11 0.49 FMO5 13775 0.68 -0.16 0.34 SLC7A8 13772 0.70 -0.20 0.41 VMD2L1 13761 0.72 -0.24 0.41 FABP1 13694 0.77 -0.28 0.54 ACY1 13687 0.77 -0.31 0.51 2810439F02RIK 13666 0.78 -0.33 0.46 AQP7 13606 0.80 -0.36 0.36 BC089597 13552 0.81 -0.38 0.23 VWA1 13538 0.81 -0.40 0.51 CYP3A11 13505 0.82 -0.43 0.27 ARG2 13494 0.82 -0.45 0.46 CYP2D26 13464 0.82 -0.47 0.54 C1QDC2 13463 0.82 -0.49 0.52 SPSB4 13423 0.83 -0.51 0.48 PLOD2 13165 0.85 -0.51 0.43 DNMT2 13019 0.86 -0.52 0.44 FBP1 12989 0.86 -0.54 0.42 M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 24 Supplementary Table S18 Genes upregulated in B6-Jax cohoused with B6-Tac (GSE18348) 8 and in Duoxa-/mice (leading edge gene subset corresponding to left panel of Fig. 5E) # of genes up in Jax(+Tac) vs Jax (>2.5 fold; p<0.05): 71 leading-edge subset (core enrichment): 46 Gene name Rank in gene list Duoxa-/vs wt Running ES Jax(+Tac) vs Jax Plet1 0 3.63 0.07 77.30 SAA1 2 2.47 0.12 28.04 RETNLB 4 2.06 0.16 46.51 UBD 10 1.85 0.20 5.21 HEMT1 11 1.84 0.23 19.74 SAA2 13 1.77 0.26 11.07 FUT2 20 1.66 0.29 13.80 HK2 21 1.65 0.32 5.15 SLFN4 24 1.60 0.34 2.66 PLA2G5 33 1.52 0.36 10.10 SAA3 40 1.49 0.39 3.06 CEACAM10 48 1.45 0.41 3.10 CXCL9 50 1.45 0.43 3.58 SMPDL3B 69 1.39 0.44 2.96 IIGP1 79 1.38 0.46 2.55 ZBP1 83 1.36 0.48 3.08 ADM 86 1.36 0.50 2.89 SLC6A14 98 1.34 0.51 3.24 TIFA 104 1.33 0.53 4.33 NOS2 107 1.33 0.54 8.23 IGK-V32 116 1.32 0.56 4.33 TAT 117 1.32 0.57 8.79 LY6D 154 1.29 0.58 3.69 MYL7 161 1.29 0.60 2.70 SLC5A9 178 1.27 0.61 2.87 LY6A 183 1.27 0.62 3.43 CD177 225 1.25 0.63 4.63 STEAP1 243 1.24 0.64 4.85 STOM 246 1.24 0.65 4.18 CEBPD 254 1.24 0.66 3.44 DMBT1 290 1.23 0.67 3.17 BHMT 336 1.21 0.68 5.10 PTK6 381 1.21 0.69 2.61 TGM2 454 1.19 0.69 3.29 MUC4 473 1.19 0.70 2.60 SOCS3 593 1.18 0.70 8.16 M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 25 IL18 601 1.17 0.71 4.31 MAL 642 1.17 0.72 5.35 UPP1 720 1.16 0.72 2.65 AQP4 787 1.16 0.72 6.52 GZMB 858 1.15 0.72 3.83 CD38 1113 1.14 0.71 5.14 SERPINA3G 1180 1.13 0.71 3.27 PFKFB3 1196 1.13 0.72 6.41 RDH16 1198 1.13 0.73 2.66 CCND1 1243 1.13 0.73 2.56 M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 26 Supplementary Table S19 Genes downregulated in B6-Jax cohoused with B6-Tac (GSE18348) 8 and in Duoxa-/mice (leading edge gene subset corresponding to right panel of Fig. 5E) # of genes down in Jax(+Tac) vs Jax (<0.5 fold; p<0.05): 141 leading-edge subset (core enrichment): 70 Gene name Rank in gene list Duoxa-/vs wt Running ES Jax(+Tac) vs Jax SUSD2 13787 0.56 0.00 0.37 SLC5A4A 13782 0.59 -0.03 0.28 SLC5A4B 13779 0.65 -0.06 0.44 1300013J15RIK 13776 0.68 -0.08 0.23 FMO5 13775 0.68 -0.10 0.21 PCK1 13774 0.68 -0.12 0.20 TREH 13757 0.73 -0.14 0.42 CYP27A1 13754 0.73 -0.16 0.38 OPLAH 13726 0.75 -0.17 0.44 CES1 13699 0.76 -0.19 0.27 FABP1 13694 0.77 -0.20 0.34 BMP8B 13693 0.77 -0.22 0.37 METTL7A 13682 0.77 -0.23 0.35 AI451617 13675 0.78 -0.24 0.41 BC021608 13673 0.78 -0.26 0.26 2810439F02RIK 13666 0.78 -0.27 0.31 CUBN 13660 0.79 -0.28 0.20 BST1 13627 0.79 -0.29 0.36 AQP7 13606 0.80 -0.30 0.19 SULT1A1 13561 0.81 -0.31 0.36 BC089597 13552 0.81 -0.32 0.44 VWA1 13538 0.81 -0.33 0.30 SLC5A11 13508 0.82 -0.34 0.30 CYP3A11 13505 0.82 -0.35 0.05 ARG2 13494 0.82 -0.36 0.22 SLC6A20A 13489 0.82 -0.37 0.26 SELENBP1 13465 0.82 -0.38 0.34 CYP2D26 13464 0.82 -0.39 0.18 C1QDC2 13463 0.82 -0.40 0.40 CAT 13434 0.83 -0.41 0.84 SPSB4 13423 0.83 -0.42 0.40 ABCC2 13390 0.83 -0.43 0.19 C920025E04RIK 13384 0.83 -0.44 0.31 OSBPL1A 13378 0.83 -0.45 0.43 SLC22A4 13369 0.84 -0.46 0.41 EPHX2 13335 0.84 -0.46 0.38 M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 27 CYP3A25 13330 0.84 -0.47 0.20 PDZK1 13258 0.84 -0.48 0.24 ALDH1A7 13229 0.85 -0.48 0.44 CML5 13209 0.85 -0.49 0.37 PLOD2 13165 0.85 -0.50 0.27 GPR172B 13156 0.85 -0.51 0.44 TSPAN5 13133 0.85 -0.51 0.39 CBR1 13096 0.86 -0.52 0.42 METTL7A 13026 0.86 -0.52 0.41 DNMT2 13019 0.86 -0.53 0.43 FBP1 12989 0.86 -0.54 0.29 EHHADH 12924 0.87 -0.54 0.41 TBC1D24 12893 0.87 -0.54 0.36 GUCA2B 12878 0.87 -0.55 0.39 TMEM43 12876 0.87 -0.56 0.41 TYKI 12851 0.87 -0.56 0.23 NR1D2 12834 0.87 -0.57 0.43 CYP4V3 12694 0.88 -0.57 0.18 HEXB 12653 0.88 -0.57 0.39 MME 12599 0.88 -0.57 0.14 AW491445 12459 0.89 -0.57 0.25 UGT2B5 12445 0.89 -0.58 0.25 PPARGC1A 12443 0.89 -0.58 0.29 RDH7 12413 0.89 -0.59 0.09 CYP3A44 12386 0.89 -0.59 0.32 HSD17B4 12378 0.89 -0.60 0.42 ANGPTL4 12284 0.89 -0.60 0.21 BMP1 12183 0.90 -0.60 0.43 CYP4B1 12051 0.90 -0.59 0.35 APOC3 11983 0.90 -0.59 0.23 THRSP 11886 0.91 -0.59 0.42 SLC5A6 11827 0.91 -0.59 0.38 MMP15 11803 0.91 -0.59 0.44 0610009A07RIK 11795 0.91 -0.60 0.39 M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 28 Supplementary Table S20 Genes upregulated in cCD (Ref. 9, Tbl. S10) and Duoxa-/mice (leading edge gene subset corresponding to upper panel of Fig. 6C) # of genes upregulated in cCD vs Ctrl: 287 with expression data for mouse homolog: 172 leading-edge subset (core enrichment): 53 Gene name Rank in gene list Duoxa-/vs wt Running ES cCD vs Ctrl ST3GAL4 0 2.55 0.04 2.12 SAA1 1 2.47 0.08 5.82 IL1RL1 2 2.30 0.11 1.65 IFI44 6 1.87 0.14 1.54 SAA2 12 1.77 0.16 5.98 MMP3 13 1.76 0.19 15.13 S100A9 15 1.68 0.21 6.04 HK2 19 1.65 0.23 2.75 AREG 20 1.64 0.25 2.26 TLR2 23 1.58 0.27 1.94 S100A8 24 1.55 0.29 8.62 CXCL10 27 1.54 0.31 4.24 TLR4 29 1.53 0.32 1.73 CXCL1 35 1.50 0.34 3.63 IL1B 43 1.45 0.36 6.42 CXCL9 46 1.45 0.37 4.53 CXCL11 50 1.42 0.39 4.94 CXCL5 64 1.39 0.40 9.24 CA1 68 1.38 0.41 2.81 ZBP1 74 1.36 0.42 1.87 ADM 77 1.36 0.44 2.05 SLC6A14 88 1.34 0.45 7.32 TIFA 94 1.33 0.46 1.57 LY6D 135 1.29 0.47 2.70 CD177 194 1.25 0.47 4.69 SLAMF7 203 1.24 0.48 1.88 CCL28 204 1.24 0.49 2.34 STEAP1 210 1.24 0.50 1.99 MTHFD2 222 1.24 0.51 1.63 DMBT1 244 1.23 0.51 2.16 MSR1 268 1.22 0.52 1.70 ADAMTS1 296 1.21 0.52 1.71 ANXA3 304 1.21 0.53 1.66 NFKBIZ 315 1.21 0.54 2.33 STEAP4 347 1.20 0.54 2.18 M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 29 TGM2 374 1.19 0.55 1.89 MUC4 391 1.19 0.56 5.30 TNFRSF17 405 1.19 0.56 1.60 DUSP6 472 1.18 0.56 1.57 STAT1 542 1.17 0.56 2.36 CD274 548 1.17 0.57 2.31 GBP1 555 1.17 0.57 2.57 NPL 686 1.15 0.57 1.57 CH25H 723 1.15 0.57 1.71 PTGFR 724 1.15 0.58 1.52 CD86 772 1.15 0.58 1.62 CYP7B1 776 1.15 0.58 1.85 CCR1 782 1.15 0.59 1.73 MMP10 809 1.14 0.59 9.42 KCNE3 883 1.14 0.59 1.70 CD38 897 1.14 0.60 1.76 LCP2 918 1.13 0.60 1.50 GBP4 961 1.13 0.60 1.91 M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 30 Supplementary Table S21 Genes downregulated in ileum of cCD patients 9 and Duoxa-/mice (leading edge gene subset corresponding to lower panel of Fig. 6C) # of genes downregulated in cCD vs Ctrl: 285 with expression data for mouse homolog: 163 leading-edge subset (core enrichment): 72 Gene name Rank in gene list Duoxa-/vs wt Running ES cCD vs Ctrl SUSD2 11293 0.56 0.00 0.34 SLC2A2 11286 0.66 -0.03 0.36 FMO5 11284 0.68 -0.06 0.53 PCK1 11283 0.68 -0.08 0.36 TREH 11268 0.73 -0.10 0.30 PDK2 11267 0.73 -0.12 0.62 HMGCS2 11261 0.73 -0.14 0.27 XPNPEP2 11260 0.73 -0.15 0.26 REEP6 11252 0.75 -0.17 0.31 LEAP2 11232 0.76 -0.19 0.44 ACE 11225 0.76 -0.20 0.45 ESPN 11216 0.77 -0.22 0.57 ACY1 11208 0.77 -0.23 0.62 OSR2 11207 0.77 -0.25 0.60 ANPEP 11186 0.79 -0.26 0.48 AQP1 11154 0.80 -0.27 0.63 CD8B 11139 0.80 -0.28 0.55 AQP7 11137 0.80 -0.30 0.31 METTL7B 11124 0.80 -0.31 0.59 DBP 11121 0.80 -0.32 0.60 SLC5A11 11050 0.82 -0.33 0.33 SEMA6C 11044 0.82 -0.34 0.67 SLC15A1 11036 0.82 -0.35 0.36 CYP2S1 11017 0.82 -0.36 0.57 SLC13A2 10964 0.83 -0.37 0.36 SLC13A1 10919 0.84 -0.37 0.29 EPHX2 10898 0.84 -0.38 0.61 SULT2B1 10874 0.84 -0.39 0.50 GGT1 10871 0.84 -0.40 0.60 HTR1D 10863 0.84 -0.41 0.37 PDZK1 10832 0.84 -0.42 0.36 SOAT2 10820 0.85 -0.42 0.20 ABP1 10793 0.85 -0.43 0.58 SI 10745 0.85 -0.44 0.46 ABCG8 10732 0.85 -0.45 0.50 TM6SF2 10701 0.85 -0.45 0.36 M AN US CR IP T AC CE PT ED ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 31 GAL3ST1 10680 0.86 -0.46 0.40 SLC9A3R1 10677 0.86 -0.47 0.62 SLC39A4 10676 0.86 -0.48 0.53 BCAN 10668 0.86 -0.49 0.63 FBP1 10593 0.86 -0.49 0.49 DNASE1 10549 0.87 -0.49 0.39 ACOX2 10537 0.87 -0.50 0.57 ITIH3 10534 0.87 -0.51 0.31 KHK 10216 0.88 -0.49 0.38 GPD1 10195 0.88 -0.49 0.42 CHAD 10179 0.89 -0.50 0.45 SLC6A4 10168 0.89 -0.50 0.27 DAK 10158 0.89 -0.51 0.59 DPEP1 10007 0.89 -0.50 0.31 CLDN15 9983 0.89 -0.51 0.53 MLXIPL 9953 0.90 -0.51 0.48 PKLR 9936 0.90 -0.52 0.30 AMN 9892 0.90 -0.52 0.44 GP2 9859 0.90 -0.52 0.39 NPY 9855 0.90 -0.53 0.32 APOC3 9742 0.90 -0.53 0.23 PHYH 9734 0.90 -0.53 0.56 SFRP5 9666 0.91 -0.53 0.24 DGAT1 9578 0.91 -0.53 0.60 C6 9536 0.91 -0.53 0.21 KLKB1 9518 0.91 -0.53 0.52 TM4SF5 9511 0.91 -0.54 0.37 ASPA 9433 0.91 -0.54 0.47 SLC22A5 9422 0.92 -0.54 0.58 MEP1A 9252 0.92 -0.53 0.50 FGFR3 9235 0.92 -0.53 0.65 RDH5 9203 0.92 -0.54 0.64 LCT 9181 0.92 -0.54 0.19 NR1I3 9081 0.93 -0.54 0.42 HSD3B1 9079 0.93 -0.54 0.30 RGS11 9070 0.93 -0.54 0.59 "
